AIMS: Cost-Efficient LLM-based Agent Deployment in
Hybrid Cloud-Edge Environments
Shiyi Liu
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
sl9hm@virginia.edu
Haiying Shen
Department of Computer Science
University of Virginia
hs6ms@virginia.edu
Shuai Che
Microsoft
Che.Shuai@microsoft.com
Mahdi Ghandi
Microsoft
Mahdi.Ghandi@microsoft.com
Mingqin Li∗
Shopify
Mingqin.Li@shopify.com
1 Introduction
The landscape of natural language processing (NLP) has
evolved with LLMs like GPT-5, showcasing unprecedented
text generation capabilities [35, 57]. These models serve as
the cognitive core in autonomous AI agents, revolutionizing
traditional AI by integrating reasoning capability and tool
use, thus enabling diverse interactions and generalization
abilities [14, 25, 30, 47, 54, 56, 61, 62, 67].
The AI agents, such as the notable Auto-GPT [46] and Au-
toGen [59], have expanded AI’s reach. They process a user’s
request by breaking it into subtasks and using the Internet
search and other tools in an automatic process [24, 26, 67].
Each subtask represents a specific action or decision that the
AI agent needs to perform to progress toward completing the
user request. For example, when an AI agent receives a ques-
tion “Who was the maternal grandfather of the person who
directed the 1997 film Titanic?”, it generates three subtasks
“Identify the director of Titanic (1997)”, “Find the director’s
mother”, and “Determine the mother’s father”. The language
model is invoked at each step to interpret the current state,
execute the subtask, and generate the next subtask. This iter-
ative process continues, with the agent potentially creating
new subtasks or refining existing ones based on intermediate
results, until it determines that the original request has been
satisfactorily addressed. This process is reminiscent of ad-
vanced AI techniques like Chain of Thought (CoT) [58] and
Reflexion [45], enhancing the agent’s decision-making and
problem-solving abilities. The effectiveness of these agents
heavily depends on the language models’ ability to accurately
interpret and execute each subtask.
Despite their capabilities, these LLM-based AI agents incur
high operational costs ($0.01/1K prompt tokens for GPT-4o)
from frequent cloud-based API queries, presenting signif-
icant economic challenges [32]. For example, incorporat-
ing ChatGPT for enterprise use is expected to pose a finan-
cial burden exceeding $9,000 monthly on small businesses
[10, 32]. If a company provides AI agent services using its
own LLM APIs, it incurs high operational costs. For example,
serving ChatGPT costs approximately $694,444 per day in
compute hardware costs [43].
1862
Abstract
In the realm of AI, large language models (LLMs) like GPT-5,
central to the operation of AI agents, predominantly op-
erate in the cloud, incurring high operational costs. With
local-based small language models (SLMs) becoming more
accurate, the necessity of cloud-exclusive processing is being
reconsidered. An AI agent’s response to a user’s request com-
prises a series of subtasks or iterations. Existing approaches
choose either an LLM or SLM for the entire request to ensure
similar outputs, but this is ineffective for AI agents as SLMs
may generate differing subtasks, compromising final accu-
racy. In this paper, we first conduct experimental analysis to
understand the features of AI agent operations. Leveraging
our findings, we propose the Adaptive Iteration-level Model
Selector (AIMS), a lightweight scheduler to automatically par-
tition an AI agent’s subtasks between local-based SLM and
cloud-based LLM. AIMS considers the varying subtask fea-
tures and strategically decides the location for each subtask
in order to use SLM as much as possible while maintaining
the accuracy level. Our experimental results demonstrate
that AIMS achieves up to a 27.5% relative improvement in
accuracy and up to 31.4% relative increase in SLM usage com-
pared to HybridLLM. It offloads 83.4% of subtasks to a local
SLM while attaining similar accuracy on average compared
with the cloud-only LLM approach.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Intelli-
gent agents; Planning and scheduling; Machine learning; •
Networks → Network algorithms.
Keywords: LLM systems, AI agents, hybrid cloud-edge com-
puting, model routing, cost optimization, small language
models, scheduling
ACM Reference Format:
Shiyi Liu, Haiying Shen, Shuai Che, Mahdi Ghandi, and Mingqin
Li. 2026. AIMS: Cost-Efficient LLM-based Agent Deployment in
Hybrid Cloud-Edge Environments. In 21st European Conference
on Computer Systems (EUROSYS ’26), April 27–30, 2026, Edinburgh,
Scotland Uk. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3767295.3803622
∗This work was done when the author was at Microsoft.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribu-
tion 4.0 International License.
EUROSYS ’26, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2212-7/26/04
https://doi.org/10.1145/3767295.3803622
Figure 1. Dataflow of AIMS.
Companies can reduce the cost of providing AI agent ser-
vices by leveraging users’ edge devices (e.g., laptops) and
incentivize users to adopt this system by offering lower ser-
vice prices. Therefore, this work studies the computation
breakdown for AI agents between the cloud and a user’s
local edge device. This approach is motivated by previous
findings that an SLM can match the accuracy of the LLM in
certain scenarios [12, 40, 63]. HybridLLM [8] employs a clas-
sifier to allocate a request to either SLM or LLM, ensuring
that the SLM’s output matches that of the LLM. We con-
ducted experiments on AI agents based on different datasets
and observed:
(1) Using HybridLLM to allocate each subtask indepen-
dently to SLM or LLM within an AI agent process may
degrade the final output’s accuracy, as SLM might pro-
duce a different subsequent subtask compared to LLM.
(2) For certain requests and subtasks of a request, their
simplicity allows for comparable accuracy when ex-
ecuted locally on a personal device instead of in the
cloud.
(3) Subtask position can influence the accuracy impact of
SLM-LLM switching, with later stages showing greater
effects.
(4) SLM typically generates more subtasks for a later LLM
subtask to gradually converge to a similar output.
Deploying LLM-based agents in a hybrid cloud–edge set-
ting raises a systems question: how to reduce cloud inference
cost by executing as much of the agent workflow as possible
on an on-device SLM, without materially degrading end-to-
end task success. Unlike conventional request routing, an
agent executes an interdependent sequence of subtasks; rout-
ing decisions early in the chain can change later subtasks,
cascading into different computational paths and accuracy
outcomes. This motivates position-aware routing, where the
scheduler must consider both per-subtask characteristics and
the subtask’s stage in the agent’s reasoning process.
To meet this need, based on the observations, we propose
the Adaptive Iteration-level Model Selector (AIMS), a light-
weight scheduler that maximizes the fraction of subtasks
executed on the local SLM while retaining accuracy relative
to a cloud LLM, using a similarity-based accuracy target
learned from offline profiling. In the current design, AIMS
does not take an explicit latency or monetary budget as an
online input; instead, we report latency empirically and show
that scheduling overhead is small.
As shown in Figure 1, AIMS utilizes offline fine-tuned mod-
els to estimate the output similarity of a request or subtask
on SLM and LLM to select the most suitable model. It takes
the following steps: 1) if the outputs for the entire request
are similar, SLM processes the entire request; 2) otherwise,
for each of its subtasks, if its outputs are similar, SLM pro-
cesses the subtask; 3) if the outputs differ, AIMS identifies a
convergence point in the subtask series where the SLM and
LLM outputs align and then continues using the SLM until
that point; 4) If no convergence is detected, the subtask is
decomposed to simpler subtasks and processed by the SLM
only if all decomposed subtasks produce outputs similar to
those of the LLM.
Our hybrid deployment model considers edge devices such
as smart phone and gaming laptops, running 1-4B parame-
ter models locally, while cloud resources provide access to
frontier models (GPT-5, Claude) via API calls. The system
must dynamically balance local compute utilization against
network communication costs and cloud service charges.
AIMS differs from existing approaches like HybridLLM
through its holistic treatment of AI agent subtasks. Rather
than making isolated decisions, AIMS recognizes the inter-
connected nature of agent reasoning. The system employs
position-aware decision-making, setting higher similarity
thresholds for later subtasks to meet their increased accu-
racy requirements. Furthermore, AIMS identifies the conver-
gence point to increase local processing opportunities. These
novelties enable AIMS to more effectively balance cost and
accuracy throughout the agent reasoning process.
Our contributions are as follows:
• Experimental analysis on subtask allocation in
AI agents. We made several insightful observations
from our experimental analysis. For example, unlike
allocating a single request between the SLM and LLM
that only needs to ensure the similarity of their outputs,
allocating the subtasks for a request for AI agent has
a unique challenge: if a subtask is allocated to SLM,
the subsequent subtasks will vary, which affects the
accuracy of the final output.
• Proposal of AIMS. Building on the observations from
our experimental analysis, we propose AIMS. AIMS
intelligently determines the allocation of subtasks be-
tween the local SLM and cloud-based LLM in order to
use SLM as much as possible while maintaining the
accuracy level.
• Comprehensive experiments of AIMS. Across nine
datasets (HotpotQA, GSM8K, DROP, HumanEval, Web-
Shop, MATH, WebArena, WorFBench, ToolBench), AIMS
delivers a 27.5% relative improvement in output accu-
racy over HybridLLM on average (macro), with ab-
solute gains of 12–17%, while increasing SLM usage
1863
by up to 31.4% (relative) on average. In cost terms,
for the Qwen3-4B+GPT-5 pair, AIMS reduces cloud
LLM spend by 40.6% versus HybridLLM (macro) and
by 83.4% versus an All-LLM policy. Using our token-
footprint accounting and current API prices, this trans-
lates to savings of approximately $3,820 (GPT-5) to
$7,450 (Claude Sonnet 4) per one million requests com-
pared to All-LLM, while simultaneously improving
accuracy over HybridLLM and Minions [31].
This adaptive model selection framework, which is the
first work in the realm of autonomous AI agents to our knowl-
edge, represents a possibility of more efficient, cost-effective
AI agent applications.
2 Motivation and Experiment Analysis
2.1 Experiment Settings and Metrics
We implement the agent stack using AutoGen [59]. Exper-
iments run on a local device with an RTX 5090 GPU. We
evaluate two model pairs: Qwen3-4B (SLM) + GPT-5 (LLM)
and Gemma3-4B (SLM) + Claude Sonnet 4 (LLM). Local SLMs
are executed with llama.cpp using 4–6 GB VRAM; cloud
LLMs are accessed via their public APIs.
We evaluated on five datasets: GSM8K [6], HotPotQA [65],
DROP [9], HumanEval [4], and WebShop [66]. These datasets
are widely used for evaluating language model-based AI
agents [18, 23, 36, 45, 53, 58, 67]. GSM8K has 8,500 grade
school math word problems, and its accuracy is measured
by the percentage of correct answers. HotPotQA contains
complex questions requiring reasoning. DROP contains ques-
tions involving numerical operations and discrete reasoning.
The accuracy of HotPotQA and DROP is measured by the F1
score. HumanEval contains 164 programming problems, and
its accuracy is measured by the pass@1 metric [4]. WebShop
contains user purchasing requests and its accuracy is based
on BERTScore [69] compared to the ground-truth product
descriptions. We consider a response to be similar if the
BERTScore is higher than a threshold (e.g., 0.7).
Completion rate is the percentage of requests completed
within 5 minutes. The number of subtasks is the number of
subtasks to complete a request. SLM usage is the percentage
of subtasks processed by SLM per request. In this paper, we
focus on text-based AI agents, therefore we use semantic
similarity to quantify the alignment of SLM outputs and
LLM outputs. We define two outputs as similar if the cosine
similarity between their SBERT embeddings [41] exceeds a
threshold. Unless otherwise specified, the threshold is set
to 0.7, which is empirically determined. AIMS uses a single
similarity threshold and Section 4.6 presents the sensitivity
study of this threshold. We report the average results of all
requests from the two model pairs and for all datasets if not
specifically indicated in the figure or table.
All-SLM Random HybridLLM Oracle All-LLM
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Qwen3-4B + GPT-5
All-SLM Random HybridLLM Oracle All-LLM
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Gemma-3-4B + Claude Sonnet 4
SLM usage percentage Accuracy Completion rate
Figure 2. Performance of existing methods.
2.2 The Need for a Subtask Scheduler
We conducted experiments comparing the performance of
five existing methods: HybridLLM [8], All-SLM, All-LLM,
Oracle, and random assignment (Random). In HybridLLM,
the routing classifier operates at the subtask level, sending
each subtask independently to either the local SLM or the
cloud LLM. All-SLM processes an entire request using only
the SLM, while All-LLM processes the request entirely using
the LLM. Oracle achieves the accuracy threshold (empiri-
cally determined as 90% of the All-LLM’s accuracy) while
maximizing SLM usage by finding the optimal subtask as-
signment between the SLM and LLM for each user request.
It is determined by enumerating all possible assignments for
each subtask.
Figure 2 reports macro-averages (across datasets) of SLM
usage, accuracy, and completion rate for each method under
the two new model pairs. As expected, All-SLM attains the
lowest accuracy (42.95% on average), while All-LLM achieves
the highest accuracy (93.15%) at the cost of 0% SLM usage.
Random yields moderate accuracy (47.65%), and HybridLLM
improves to 66.08%. Oracle slightly sacrifices accuracy for
substantially higher SLM usage, reaching 84.05% accuracy
with 72.25% SLM usage. Compared to Oracle, HybridLLM
delivers 17.97% lower accuracy and 31.20% lower SLM usage;
compared to All-LLM, HybridLLM is 27.07% lower in accu-
racy. Completion rates follow the same ordering for both
pairs: Oracle ≈ All-LLM > HybridLLM ≈ Random > All-SLM.
In addition, Table 1 reports the percentage of incorrect
assignment decisions for HybridLLM and Random relative
to Oracle. An assignment is counted as incorrect when a
subtask is routed to the SLM while Oracle routes it to the
LLM, or vice versa. HybridLLM makes incorrect assignments
in 33.80% of cases with Qwen3+GPT-5 and 35.70% with
Gemma3+Claude S4; Random is higher at 45.25% and 41.95%,
1864
HotpotQA
GSM8K
DROP
HumanEval
WebShop
0%
20%
40%
60%
Similar final output
HotpotQA
GSM8K
DROP
HumanEval
WebShop
0%
20%
40%
60%
Similar subtask output
Qwen3-4B + GPT-5 Gemma-3-4B + Claude Sonnet 4
Figure 3. Similar output percentage across datasets.
respectively. These errors stem from assigning subtasks in-
dependently without accounting for inter-subtask depen-
dencies, underscoring the need for holistic, workflow-aware
assignment. The results highlight the suboptimality of Hy-
bridLLM and Random and the headroom for improved sub-
task allocation strategies.
Table 1. Percentage of incorrect assignments.
Method Qwen3 + GPT-5 Gemma3 + Claude S4
HybridLLM 33.80% 35.70%
Random 45.25% 41.95%
Observation 1. Using the existing HybridLLM infer-
ence system in AI agent scenarios, which assigns each
subtask independently to either the SLM or LLM, fails to
optimize accuracy or SLM usage, highlighting the need
for a more advanced approach. (Figure 2 and Table 1)
To investigate subtask-level model assignment and iden-
tify which subtasks can be effectively handled by SLM, we
conduct two additional experiments, presented in Figure 3:
1) the percentage of user requests where the final outputs
are similar when processed entirely by either SLM or LLM
(left), and 2) the average percentage of individual subtasks of
a request processed by LLM, for which SLM produces similar
subtask outputs. The figure shows that 23.3%-44.9% of user
requests and 30.2%-68.9% of subtask outputs can be handled
by SLMs without compromising accuracy, with percentages
varying across datasets. These findings indicate significant
opportunities to reduce cloud usage by leveraging SLMs for
suitable tasks and subtasks.
Observation 2. The SLM can manage certain user
requests and subtasks, producing outputs similar to the
LLM. (Figure 3)
2.3 Impact of Subtask Stage
This experiment assessed the accuracy impact of switching
a single subtask from LLM to SLM while keeping the others
on LLM, and vice versa, switching one subtask from SLM
to LLM while keeping the rest on SLM. To account for user
requests with varying numbers of subtasks, we grouped
Early Mid Late
Subtask position
-10%
-5%
+0%
+5%
+10%
Δ
Accuracy
(%)
SLM→LLM LLM→SLM
(a) Accuracy Δ by switching a
subtask between SLM and LLM.
HotpotQA
GSM8K
DROP
HumanEval
WebShop
0
5
10
15
Number
of
subtasks
LLM SLM
(b) The number of subtasks in
All-SLM and All-LLM.
Figure 4. Subtask behavior under different model assign-
ments.
the subtasks into three relative positions: Early (first third),
Middle (middle third), and Late (final third) stages within the
request’s subtask sequence.
Figure 4a shows the average accuracy impact of switching
a subtask at different stages. The results show that switching
a subtask from LLM to SLM causes an average accuracy
drop of 5.25% in the Early stage, 7.59% in the Middle stage,
and 9.53% in the Late stage. Conversely, switching a subtask
from SLM to LLM yields accuracy gains of 5.14%, 6.25%,
and 9.40% in the Early, Middle, and Late stages, respectively.
These findings suggest that SLM can manage early subtasks
with minimal accuracy loss, but as tasks progress, leveraging
LLM’s advanced capabilities becomes increasingly critical.
Observation 3. Subtask position can influence the ac-
curacy impact of SLM-LLM switching, with later stages
showing greater effects, highlighting its importance in
subtask allocation decisions. (Figure 4a)
Figure 4b illustrates the average number of subtasks gen-
erated per user request in All-SLM and All-LLM, respectively,
across all datasets, considering only the requests that pro-
duced correct results. All-SLM generates more subtasks per
request than All-LLM, with SLM averaging 6.37 subtasks
per user request compared to LLM’s 5.9. This indicates that
SLM decomposes requests into more granular subtasks due
to its limited capability to handle complex requests, whereas
LLM’s superior ability enables it to generate fewer, more
comprehensive subtasks.
Figure 5. S-L distance illustration.
1865
0
1
2
∞ S-L distance for matched final results
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0
5
10
∞ S-L distance for unmatched final results
Avg.
S-L
distance
4-ST request 5-ST request 6-ST request 7-ST request 8-ST request
Figure 6. S-L distance comparison across subtask sequence.
To evaluate the convergence of SLM and LLM subtasks,
we introduce the concept of S-L distance for an LLM subtask.
This distance represents the number of additional SLM sub-
tasks needed to produce a subtask similar (or match) to this
LLM subtask, with their similarity defined as S-L similarity.
Figure 5 illustrates the S-L distance, where LLM-generated
subtasks are denoted as L1, L2, and L3, while SLM-generated
subtasks are denoted as S1, S2, S3, S4, S5, and S6. Dashed lines
indicate matched outputs between SLM and LLM subtasks.
Subtask L1’s S-L distance is 1, indicating that one additional
SLM subtask is needed to match it. L2 has an S-L distance
of 2, requiring two extra SLM subtasks for a match. L3 di-
rectly corresponds to S6, resulting in an S-L distance of 0. If
no matched SLM subtask is found for an LLM subtask, its
S-L distance is set to infinity. This metric provides insight
into the alignment between SLM and LLM outputs during re-
quest processing, highlighting how SLM subtask granularity
compares to that of LLM at different stages.
We ran each request using both All-LLM and All-SLM
and categorized the requests into two groups: those with
matched final results between LLM and SLM, and those with-
out. Within each group, we further classified the requests
into subgroups based on the number of subtasks (ST) gener-
ated (i.e., request length). Figure 6 presents the average S-L
distance across LLM subtasks with the same sequence ID (X
axis) in each subgroup for matched request group (top) and
unmatched request group (bottom), respectively. For exam-
ple, “4-ST request” represents the request subgroup that has
4 subtasks. As the subtask sequence progresses, the average
S-L distance gradually increases in the matched group, while
in the unmatched group, many distances reach infinity, indi-
cating significant divergence between SLM and LLM subtask
outputs. The results suggest that later LLM subtasks typically
require more SLM subtasks to achieve similar outputs. SLM’s
inability to produce comparable subtask outputs ultimately
leads to discrepancies in the final request output compared
to the LLM. This observation echoes Observation 3 that the
later stage of subtasks is more important to the accuracy of
the user request.
0.6
0.8
1.0
S-L similarity for matched final results
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
S-L similarity for unmatched final results
Avg.
similarity
4-ST request 5-ST request 6-ST request 7-ST request 8-ST request
Figure 7. S-L similarity across subtask sequence IDs.
Figure 7 shows the changes of S-L similarity as the request
progresses in matched and unmatched scenarios. In matched
cases, S-L similarity gradually increases, indicating that SLM
outputs align more closely with LLM outputs in later stages.
Conversely, in unmatched scenarios, S-L similarity remains
low, suggesting persistent deviations. This measurement
supports previous findings and highlights the potential for
SLM and LLM convergence in subtask sequence, enabling
efficient subtask allocation.
Observation 4. SLM typically generates more subtasks
for a later LLM subtask to gradually converge to similar
outputs. Subtask scheduling must account for whether
an SLM’s output can converge with that of an LLM
subtask. (Figures 4b- 7)
3 Design of AIMS
3.1 Overview
Motivated by Observation 1, we propose AIMS, which dy-
namically assigns the subtasks of a request between the SLM
and LLM in order to maximize the SLM usage while main-
taining the LLM’s accuracy of processing the request.
Based on Observation 2 that the SLM may output simi-
lar results for a request or for a subtask as the LLM, AIMS
lets the SLM process the entire request in the former case.
Otherwise, it allocates each subtask to either the SLM or
LLM. For each subtask, based on Observation 4, if it finds a
convergence point, it uses the SLM until the convergence
point. Otherwise, it breaks down the current subtask into
smaller sub-subtasks to facilitate the SLM to process them
by repeating the above steps for each sub-subtask. To avoid
unnecessary LLM execution, the SLM processes decomposed
sub-subtasks only if all can be handled by the SLM; other-
wise, the original subtask is processed by the LLM. Based on
Observation 3, we use the subtask’s sequence ID to dynami-
cally adjust the similarity threshold, and also consider it in
predicting the subtask’s convergence point.
AIMS consists of several offline-trained estimators based
on profiled data. With the assistance of the estimators, after
1866
Figure 8. AIMS decision-making workflow.
receiving a user request, AIMS chooses between the SLM
and LLM for the request or its subtasks.
Offline Profiling. AIMS first profiles the AI agent that uses
SLM and LLM with various user requests and their corre-
sponding subtasks. The profiling process collects data on
the subtask outputs from SLM and LLM. This data is then
used to train prediction models, including the user request
classifier, subtask predictors for the SLM and LLM execution,
distance predictor, and subtask decomposer. These trained
models are used in the online decision making of AIMS to
make informed decisions about task or subtask allocation.
Online Decision Making. After receiving a user request
or a subtask, AIMS determines its allocation between SLM
and LLM. It first employs the user request classifier, which
determines whether processing the entire request with the
SLM will yield output similar to that of the LLM. If not, AIMS
proceeds to subtask-level decision-making for a more granu-
lar analysis. At this stage, AIMS employs subtask similarity
evaluator, S-L similarity estimator (SLE), convergence detector
(CD), and subtask decomposer (SD) approaches to determine
the suitable model for processing the current subtask. AIMS
makes decisions for every subtask using this process until
producing the final output.
AIMS follows a fast-path/slow-path design pattern: the
fast path executes on the local SLM when predictors indi-
cate the next-step behavior is safe, while the slow path falls
back to the cloud LLM for accuracy-critical decisions. Con-
vergence detection and similarity-validated decomposition
act as structured recovery paths that safely expand the frac-
tion of execution on the fast path without committing to an
irrecoverably divergent subtask.
3.2 System Design
Let 𝑅 denote a given user request, and 𝑆𝑇𝑖 denote the 𝑖𝑡ℎ dy-
namically generated subtask for request 𝑅. The workflow of
AIMS is depicted in Figure 8. First, based on Observation 2,
AIMS employs a hierarchical approach that allows AIMS
to leverage the effectiveness of SLM for user requests that
can be accurately processed by SLM alone while enabling
fine-grained subtask allocation for more complex requests.
Specifically, AIMS utilizes a lightweight request-level classi-
fier to determine if a user’s request can yield similar outputs
when executed entirely on SLM. If yes, AIMS opts for SLM
for the entire request. If not, AIMS proceeds to the next
step to perform subtask-level model assignment. The ob-
jective of AIMS is to design a 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑟: 𝑆𝑇𝑖 → {0, 1}, where
𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑟 (𝑆𝑇𝑖) = 0 and 𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑒𝑟 (𝑆𝑇𝑖) = 1 mean that the subtask
𝑆𝑇𝑖 is routed to the SLM, and to the LLM, respectively.
In the subtask-level model assignment, for the 𝑖𝑡ℎ subtask,
AIMS takes the following steps:
1) Subtask Similarity Evaluator (SSE). Based on Observa-
tion 2, AIMS estimates the output similarity of the𝑖𝑡ℎ subtask
using LLM and SLM. If they are similar, AIMS uses SLM for
this subtask. Otherwise, AIMS employs the following three
steps based on Observation 4:
2) S-L Similarity Evaluator (SLE). It first estimates the S-L
distance 𝑑 for the current subtask, followed by an evalu-
ation of the S-L similarity. If the S-L similarity meets the
required threshold (i.e., 0.7), the subtask is assigned to SLM,
as it is expected to ultimately reach a similar subtask in LLM;
otherwise, it proceeds to the next step.
3) Convergence Detection (CD). If a convergence point
cannot be identified for the current subtask, it may still be
found for a subsequent one. Hence, AIMS continuously es-
timates the outputs of SLM and LLM subtasks, comparing
1867
each SLM-LLM subtask pair until a convergence point is
identified where the S-L similarity meets the threshold. If a
convergence point is identified, all subtasks preceding it are
executed by the SLM. Otherwise, the process moves to the
next step.
4) Subtask Decomposition (SD). If convergence is not de-
tected by CD, AIMS employs its Subtask Decomposer (SD)
model, which is trained offline (Section 3.3), to predict a
sequence of simpler sub-subtasks for the current complex
subtask. For example, if a HotpotQA user request asks for the
maternal grandfather of the Titanic director, an AI agent, af-
ter identifying the director (James Cameron) and his mother
(Shirley Cameron née Lowe), might generate a complex sub-
task (𝑆𝑇𝑖): ’Verify Shirley Cameron’s father, including cor-
roborating biographical details, to confirm his identity as
James Cameron’s maternal grandfather.’ The SD might then
decompose this 𝑆𝑇𝑖 into more granular steps: 𝑆𝑆𝑇1: ’Search
for Shirley Cameron’s father’; 𝑆𝑆𝑇2: ’Extract father’s full
name’; 𝑆𝑆𝑇3: ’Find key biographical details for verification
(e.g., birth/death dates)’; 𝑆𝑆𝑇4: ’Confirm and state the mater-
nal grandfather’s name’. AIMS then uses its subtask predic-
tors (𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 and𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 ) to evaluate if the SLM can adequately
handle each predicted sub-subtask. Only if all predicted sub-
subtasks are deemed suitable for the SLM (i.e., yield similar
outputs to the LLM predictions) does AIMS direct the AI
agent to execute this decomposed sequence using the actual
SLM; otherwise, the original 𝑆𝑇𝑖 defaults to the LLM. This
allows AIMS, as a system-level scheduler, to guide the AI
agent towards a more granular execution path that leverages
the SLM’s capability to handle simpler steps.
3.3 Offline Profiling
In the offline profiling phase, AIMS collects data to fine-tune
models that predict the performance of different subtask al-
locations between SLM and LLM. The profiling is conducted
on user requests from historical trace datasets (e.g., GSM8K
and HotPotQA) and their corresponding subtasks.
Data Collection: For each user request 𝑅, we generate a
binary tree of subtasks, where each node represents a sub-
task 𝑆𝑇𝑖 and each edge represents using a model (SLM or
LLM) to process the parent subtask. Starting from the root
node, which represents the initial user request, we process
the subtask using both the SLM and LLM, creating two child
nodes. For each child node, we then recursively process the
corresponding subtask using both SLM and LLM, further cre-
ating child nodes until a predefined depth (e.g., 15 subtasks)
is reached or the model thinks the request is finished. At
each leaf node, we profile the output of executing the subtask
using the selected model. In addition to the subtask-level
profiling, we also profile the performance of executing the
entire user request 𝑅 using SLM and LLM. The similarity
of the final results from the two models is collected. More-
over, we use the SLM to generate multiple smaller subtasks
for each original subtask, creating a dataset of subtask de-
composition. Using the collected profiled data, we train the
following models.
User Request Classifier (URC): For each user request in
the profiled data, we use the user request as the input feature
and the similarity score between the outputs generated by
processing the entire user request using All-SLM and All-
LLM as the target variable. We then train the user request
classifier model using this input-output data.
Subtask Predictor (SP): We train two separate models,
𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 and 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 , which learn to predict the next subtask
when the current subtask is processed using SLM and LLM,
respectively. For each node in the binary tree of subtasks
generated during the data collection process, we use the
subtask at that node as the input feature and the subtask
generated by applying SLM or LLM to the current subtask
as the target output for the two models, respectively.
Distance Predictor (DP): The distance predictor predicts
the S-L distance. For each request in the profiled data, we
extract the content of the LLM subtask and its sequence ID
as the input features and its corresponding S-L distance as
the target label. We then train the distance predictor model
using the input and output data to predict the S-L distance.
Subtask Decomposer (SD): The subtask decomposer is trained
to break down a complex subtask into smaller, more manage-
able sub-subtasks. It takes a subtask and the predicted next
subtask from 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 for this subtask as inputs, and outputs a
sequence of sub-subtasks, aiming to ensure that the output of
the last sub-subtask is similar to the predicted next subtask
from 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 . The subtask decomposer is trained using data
derived from decomposing subtasks from user request.
For the above models, we use ModernBERT [55] as the
base for URC and DP, and Qwen3-0.6B [64] for SP and SD,
fine-tuning them with LoRA [17]. These models are then
used in the subsequent components of AIMS to make in-
formed decisions about task or subtask allocation. The esti-
mator stack requires approximately 2 GB of VRAM, which
can easily be accommodated on a modern gaming laptop
with 8-16 GB of GPU memory.
3.4 Online Decision Making
The online decision-making process comprises two stages:
request-level decision-making and subtask-level decision-
making, as detailed below.
3.4.1 Request-Level Decision Making. AIMS first uses
the user request classifier to process an incoming user re-
quest. It leverages the knowledge learned during the offline
profiling phase to identify user requests that can be accu-
rately processed by the SLM alone, avoiding unnecessary
subtask-level allocation. Specifically, AIMS feeds the request
into the user request classifier model. The classifier predicts a
similarity score between 0 and 1, indicating the expected sim-
ilarity between the results of processing the request solely
1868
using SLM versus the LLM. If the predicted similarity score is
above a predefined threshold (e.g., 0.7), AIMS processes the
entire user request using SLM, bypassing the subtask-level
allocation. Otherwise, AIMS initializes the current subtask as
the root request and enters the subtask-level routing stage.
3.4.2 Subtask-Level Decision Making. If the user request
classifier determines that a user request requires subtask-
level allocation, AIMS proceeds to the SSE to process the
subtask.
Subtask Similarity Evaluator (SSE): The subtask similar-
ity evaluator compares the outputs of the SLM and the LLM
for each subtask, assessing their similarity and making ap-
propriate model assignments based on the stage of the user
request. For each subtask 𝑆𝑇𝑖 in the user request 𝑅, AIMS
feeds the current subtask into the 𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 and 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 mod-
els. The 𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 and 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 models generate the predicted
next subtasks for the SLM and the LLM, respectively. The
subtask similarity evaluator then estimates the similarity of
the predicted next subtasks as introduced in Section 2.1. If
the similarity is above a predefined threshold 𝜅, the sub-
task 𝑆𝑇𝑖 is assigned to the SLM. The similarity threshold 𝜅
is determined through empirical analysis during the offline
profiling phase. For each SLM-LLM pair, we analyze a set
of requests and their subtasks, measuring the relationship
between threshold values and final accuracy. The sensitivity
analysis of the 𝜅 threshold can be found in Section 4.6. Or-
ganizations deploying AIMS can fine-tune these thresholds
during their offline profiling phase based on their specific
accuracy requirements and cost constraints.
Here, instead of using a constant similarity threshold,
based on Observation 3, we set the threshold adaptively
based on the subtask’s sequence ID. The threshold𝜅 is smaller
at the early stages of a request, permitting loose compar-
isons, and increases as the request progresses, making it
more stringent in the later stages. Using the experimental
data collected for Figure 4a, we compute the threshold as
𝜅 = 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 + min(𝐼𝐷, 5) · 0.02, where 𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒 =
0.6. All parameters are determined empirically.
If the similarity is below the threshold 𝜅, the simplest
way is to use LLM. However, directly using LLM results in
lower SLM usage. Observation 4 suggests that while the
SLM output may differ from the LLM output for the current
subtask, a subsequent subtask could still produce a result
similar to the LLM. Therefore, we employ three approaches:
the S-L similarity evaluator, the convergence detector, and the
subtask decomposer. The S-L similarity evaluator identifies
when a future SLM subtask matches the current LLM subtask.
The convergence detector identifies future subtasks where
the outputs of the SLM and LLM are similar. The subtask
decomposer breaks down the current subtask into smaller
subtasks to increase the likelihood of successful processing
by the SLM. The details are presented in the following.
S-L Similarity Evaluator (SLE): Guided by Observation
4, the S-L distance metric helps determine if a future SLM
subtask matches the current LLM subtask, which is crucial
for deciding whether to process a subtask using SLM or LLM.
Thus, the S-L similarity evaluator dynamically adjusts the
similarity threshold during task processing based on the
progress stage of the user request. It receives the current sub-
task 𝑆𝑇𝑖 and its sequence ID as inputs and uses the distance
predictor model to estimate the S-L distance 𝑑 between the
outputs of the SLM and the LLM, considering the current
subtask’s content. The 𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 model then predicts the output
for the (𝑖 +𝑑)𝑡ℎ subtask, while the 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 model predicts the
output for the 𝑖𝑡ℎ subtask. These outputs are compared using
the predefined similarity threshold 𝜅 (same threshold as in
the subtask similarity evaluator). If their similarity is higher
than 𝜅, the subtask 𝑆𝑇𝑖 is assigned to the SLM; otherwise, we
proceed to the next component.
Convergence Detector (CD): Guided by Observations 3
and 4, convergence detector identifies a future convergence
point between the outputs of SLM and LLM. Starting from
subtask 𝑆𝑇𝑖, the convergence detector uses 𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 and 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀
to predict future subtasks iteratively. It compares the sim-
ilarity of each pair of the SLM and LLM predictions using
the same similarity metric and threshold as previous compo-
nents. It continues this process for a predefined number of
future subtasks or until the end of the sequence. If multiple
convergence points are found, convergence detector selects
the last one to increase the use of SLM. All subtasks from 𝑆𝑇𝑖
up to the identified convergence point are then assigned to
SLM. If no convergence is detected, we proceed to the next
component.
Subtask Decomposer (SD): Guided by Observation 4, which
highlights the granularity and step-by-step nature of SLM
processing, we design the subtask decomposer. It breaks down
a complex subtask into smaller sub-subtasks, making them
easier for the SLM to process. It takes a current subtask 𝑆𝑇𝑖
as input and uses the subtask decomposer model, which is
trained during the offline profiling phase, to generate a se-
quence of sub-subtasks, denoted by {𝑆𝑆𝑇1,𝑆𝑆𝑇2, . . . ,𝑆𝑆𝑇𝑚}.
AIMS then evaluates each sub-subtask 𝑆𝑆𝑇𝑗 to determine
its suitability for processing by the SLM. Specifically, AIMS
inputs 𝑆𝑆𝑇𝑗 ’s content into both 𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 and 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 models,
which then predict the next sub-subtask. If the similarity of
the two predicted next sub-subtasks exceeds the predefined
threshold 𝜅, the sub-subtask is deemed suitable for SLM pro-
cessing. While we could allocate each sub-subtask individu-
ally to the SLM or LLM, this may increase the number of LLM
calls. To avoid this, we allocate the entire group of decom-
posed sub-subtasks or the original subtask as a single unit.
That is, only when all sub-subtasks are found suitable for the
SLM, AIMS assigns all sub-subtasks {𝑆𝑆𝑇1,𝑆𝑆𝑇2, . . . ,𝑆𝑆𝑇𝑚}
1869
to SLM to produce the output for the original subtask. Con-
versely, if any sub-subtask is unsuitable for SLM, AIMS as-
signs the subtask 𝑆𝑇𝑖 to the LLM.
Algorithm 1 AIMS online decision making process.
Require: User request R
Ensure: Final result
1: if URC(R) predicts similar outputs then
2: Process R using SLM
3: else
4: for each subtask 𝑆𝑇𝑖 generated do
5: if SSE(𝑆𝑇𝑖) predicts similar outputs then
6: Process 𝑆𝑇𝑖 using SLM
7: else if SLE(𝑆𝑇𝑖) finds high S-L similarity then
8: Process 𝑆𝑇𝑖 and next d subtasks using SLM
9: else if CD(𝑆𝑇𝑖) finds convergence point then
10: Process subtasks to convergence using SLM
11: else
12: sub_subtasks = SD(𝑆𝑇𝑖)
13: if one sub_subtask’s outputs in 𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 and
𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 are dissimilar then
14: Process 𝑆𝑇𝑖 using LLM
15: else
16: Process each sub_subtask using SLM
17: end if
18: end if
19: end for
20: end if
21: return Final result
3.4.3 Algorithm for the Process. Algorithm 1 shows the
pseudocode of the decision-making process of AIMS. When a
user request is received, the user request classifier (URC) first
predicts the similarity score of running the entire request on
SLM and LLM. If the similarity score exceeds a threshold, the
request is processed entirely by SLM (lines 1-2). Otherwise,
it advances to subtask-level decision-making (line 4). Specif-
ically, the subtask similarity evaluator (SSE) compares the
predicted outputs of the subtask from SLM and LLM using
𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 and 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 . If the outputs are similar, the subtask is
assigned to SLM (lines 5-6). If not, the S-L similarity estimator
(SLE) component, using the distance predictor (DP), estimates
the S-L distance of the current subtask (𝑑). It then uses 𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀
and 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 to predict the S-L similarity. If it is higher than
the threshold, SLM is used (lines 7-8); otherwise, the process
moves to convergence detector (CD). It attempts to identify a
convergence point, where the outputs of the SLM and LLM
are similar. If it is found, SLM is used until the convergence
point (lines 9-10). If not, the subtask decomposer (SD) breaks
the subtask into smaller sub-subtasks, and the process of
the SSE repeats for each sub-subtask. If one sub-subtask’s
outputs in the SLM and in the LLM are not similar, LLM
0
25
50
75
100
Score
HotpotQA
GSM8K
DROP
HumanEval
WebShop
MATH
WebArena
WorFBench
ToolBench
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
SLM
usage
All-SLM (Qwen3-4B) HybridLLM Minions AIMS (ours) All-LLM (GPT-5)
Figure 9. Accuracy and SLM usage.
processes 𝑆𝑇𝑖 (lines 13-14); otherwise, the SLM processes all
the sub-subtasks (line 16).
4 Performance Evaluation
4.1 Experiment Settings
The experiment settings are the same as those in Section 2.1
unless otherwise specified. We employed GPT-5+Qwen3 4B
as the LLM-SLM pair to generate 1000 subtask traces (i.e., the
sequence of subtasks generated by the AI agent from an ini-
tial user request to its final resolution) using WorFBench [38]
and GSM8K [6] to fine-tune the models in AIMS. The fine-
tuning process for all estimators took approximately 2 hours
on a cloud-based Nvidia A100, a one-time cost that enables
subsequent effective decision-making. To evaluate the per-
formance and generalization capabilities of AIMS, we test on
nine benchmarks: HotpotQA, GSM8K, DROP, HumanEval,
WebShop, MATH [15], WorFBench [38], WebArena [71], and
ToolBench [39], though we trained the AIMS in only two
of the datasets. The baseline methods for comparison are
HybridLLM [8] (explained in Section 2.2) and Minions [31].
Minions follows a collaborative cloud–edge execution model
where a planner generates subtasks, and a local small model
first attempts each subtask, escalating to a cloud LLM when
the local model is uncertain, with uncertainty measured by
the average log-probability of the generated tokens.
4.2 Overall Performance
Accuracy and SLM usage. Figure 9 summarizes accuracy
and SLM usage. We used three representative datasets to
demonstrate the performance, HotpotQA, HumanEval and
WebShop, under Qwen3-4B+GPT-5. On HotpotQA, AIMS
reaches 90.75% vs 76.35% (HybridLLM, +14.40%) and 84.20%
(Minions, +6.55%), with higher SLM usage than both (81.85%
vs 68.40% / 74.10%). On HumanEval, AIMS is 91.45% vs 73.65%
(+17.80%) and 86.10% (+5.35%); Minions uses slightly more
SLM (86.95%) than AIMS (84.10%) but trails in accuracy.
On WebShop, AIMS attains 51.20% vs 34.75% (+16.45%) and
43.10% (+8.10%), while SLM usage is comparable (81.25% vs
1870
HotpotQA GSM8K DROP HumanEval WebShop MATH WebArena WorFBench ToolBench
0
10
20
30
Average
latency
(s)
Latency Components
SLM latency
LLM latency
Method&Network overhead
Methods
AIMS
All-SLM
All-LLM
HybridLLM
Minions
Figure 10. End-to-end latency breakdown across nine benchmarks (Qwen3-4B + GPT-5 on RTX 5090). AIMS achieves latency
comparable to HybridLLM/Minions while remaining faster than All-LLM; routing + network overhead is a small fraction of
total time.
Table 2. Normalized remote cost per 100 requests (All-LLM
= 1.0). Costs are computed via token-footprint accounting;
API prices are as of September 2025.
Dataset HybridLLM Minions AIMS (ours)
HotpotQA 0.32 0.26 0.18
GSM8K 0.38 0.26 0.18
DROP 0.29 0.22 0.15
HumanEval 0.33 0.13 0.16
WebShop 0.29 0.20 0.21
MATH 0.28 0.21 0.15
WebArena 0.23 0.15 0.17
WorFBench 0.31 0.24 0.21
ToolBench 0.26 0.20 0.19
Macro avg 0.29 0.20 0.17
74.35% / 83.10%). These gains reflect AIMS’s holistic, position-
aware routing, avoiding the independent or myopic assign-
ments that limit HybridLLM and the heuristics in Minions.
Higher accuracy with greater SLM share translates to bet-
ter application outcomes at lower cloud usage. For example,
on WebShop, AIMS’s 51.20% success (vs 34.75% HybridLLM /
43.10% Minions) is achieved while using the SLM more, re-
ducing GPT-5 usage and cost; on WebArena, AIMS improves
task success to 57.90% (vs 28.60% / 45.70%) with higher SLM
usage; on ToolBench, chain correctness rises to 78.35% (vs
59.40% / 66.10%) with less reliance on the LLM. Taken to-
gether, for the same budget, AIMS completes more tasks,
and to hit the same accuracy target, it requires fewer LLM
tokens, demonstrating end-to-end benefits beyond per-step
accuracy.
Average latency. We measured average end-to-end latency
on the desktop edge (RTX 5090) and found that AIMS does
not compromise speed. Figure 10 reports the mean across
datasets: All-SLM 11.14 s, HybridLLM 12.98 s, Minions 14.21 s,
AIMS 13.33 s, and All-LLM 15.82 s. Thus, AIMS is consistently
faster than All-LLM, slower than All-SLM (as expected), and
comparable to HybridLLM and Minions. The scheduler’s
Table 3. Generalization summary across AIMS settings.
Setting ΔAcc ΔAcc Cost Latency
HLLM Minions vs All-LLM vs All-LLM
Model pairs
Qwen+GPT +12.35 +6.86 0.17× 0.82×
Gemma+Claude +13.14 +6.18 0.22× 0.76×
Hardware
RTX 5090 — — — 0.79×
iPhone 15 +10.65 +6.32 0.19× 2.52×
Model-pair rows: macro accuracy deltas (%) vs baselines and normalized
cost ratios per 100 tasks. Hardware rows: average end-to-end latency ra-
tios across datasets using the same routing policy/checkpoints (Qwen3-
4B + GPT-5 unless noted). RTX 5090 vs iPhone 15 differ in throughput;
routing/SLM usage are unchanged.
decision overhead is small (about 3-7% of AIMS’s total time),
and measured average network hop latency is 0.58 s, which is
negligible relative to end-to-end latency. Overall, offloading
selected subtasks to the local SLM reduces reliance on cloud
decoding without incurring noticeable runtime overheads.
Remote Cost. Remote monetary cost is dominated by the
cloud LLM; we treat on-device SLM execution as free and
ignore edge–cloud transfer fees. We compute cost using
token-footprint accounting (prompt + completion tokens)
multiplied by API prices (prices as of Sep 2025). To reduce
dependence on volatile pricing, Table 2 reports normalized
remote cost relative to the All-LLM baseline (All-LLM = 1.0
per dataset). Averaged across nine benchmarks, HybridLLM
costs 0.29×, Minions 0.20×, and AIMS 0.17× of All-LLM, cor-
responding to 83% savings vs. All-LLM, 41% vs. HybridLLM,
and 15% vs. Minions while maintaining higher accuracy than
HybridLLM and Minions.
4.3 Generalizability Evaluation
Table 3 summarizes transfer across model pairs and hard-
ware. For models, AIMS improves accuracy by +12.35% over
HybridLLM and +6.86% over Minions at 0.17× the cost of
All–LLM with Qwen+GPT, and by +13.14% / +6.18% at 0.22×
cost with Gemma3 + Claude Sonnet 4, demonstrating robust
1871
accuracy–cost gains across pairs. To isolate the impact of de-
vice throughput, we keep AIMS’s routing policy, thresholds,
and SLM usage fixed across hardware and change only the
execution platform. Unless noted otherwise, the hardware
results use the Qwen3-4B (SLM) + GPT-5 (LLM) pair, with the
same estimator checkpoints. On RTX 5090, AIMS achieves
0.79× the All-LLM end-to-end latency; on iPhone 15, AIMS
is 2.52× due to lower on-device throughput. Importantly,
this is a latency effect: the allocation policy is unchanged
across hardware. Any minor accuracy differences on mobile
occur only in rare cases where the on-device runtime cannot
accommodate the full context (e.g., truncation), not because
the routing logic changes.
4.4 Ablation Study
Ablation—components. Table 4 quantifies the effect of re-
moving AIMS components. Relative to AIMS (full) (77.62% ac-
curacy, 83.58% SLM), removing the subtask decomposer (w/o
SD) lowers accuracy to 76.04% (−1.58%) and reduces SLM us-
age to 78.04% (−5.54%), indicating SD’s role in exposing safe
SLM opportunities. Further disabling convergence detection
(URC+SSE+SLE) drops accuracy and SLM usage more sharply
(73.90%, −3.72%; 75.52%, −8.06%), showing CD’s contribution
to stability. Removing SLE as well (URC+SSE) yields 72.48%
(−5.14%) and 72.36% (−11.22%). With URC only, accuracy
falls to 70.10% (−7.52%) and SLM usage to 71.98% (−11.60%),
revealing that single-stage request routing is too conser-
vative. Finally, w/o URC retains accuracy (76.82%, −0.82%)
but incurs the largest SLM reduction (70.18%, −13.44%), con-
firming URC’s value as an initial filter that safely increases
SLM share. Overall, each component materially helps decide
when a subtask can be moved to the SLM without harming
accuracy.
Ablation—training data. Figure 11 varies the fraction of
training traces used by the estimators ({0, 10, 25, 50, 100}%).
The AIMS system components are trained on subtask traces
generated from WorFBench and GSM8K using the indicated
fraction of training traces, and evaluated as macro-averages
over the other seven benchmarks (HotpotQA, DROP, Hu-
manEval, WebShop, MATH, WebArena, ToolBench). As shown
in Figure 11, accuracy improves monotonically from 68.3% →
77.5% while SLM usage rises from 69.5% → 83.6%. Gains are
most pronounced up to 50% of traces (76.1% accuracy, 81.2%
SLM), after which improvements taper, indicating dimin-
ishing returns and suggesting that moderate data budgets
already capture most of AIMS’s benefit.
4.5 Performance of Estimators
Table 5 reports estimator accuracy and latency share. We
train on WorFBench and GSM8K and evaluate generalization
on the remaining benchmarks. We optionally apply contin-
ual fine-tuning (CFT) every 500 new requests: we collect the
most recent batch of 500 execution traces and perform in-
cremental LoRA updates to the estimator stack (URC, DP,
0%10% 25% 50% 100%
Training Traces Used
68%
70%
72%
74%
76%
78%
AIMS
Accuracy
(macro)
AIMS Accuracy
AIMS SLM-Usage
70%
72%
74%
76%
78%
80%
82%
84%
AIMS
SLM-Usage
(macro)
Figure 11. Training-data ablation for AIMS (Qwen3-4B +
GPT-5).
Table 4. Ablation study of AIMS components.
Variant
Acc. (%) ↑ SLM (%) ↑
Value Δ Value Δ
AIMS (full) 77.62 — 83.58 —
w/o SD 76.04 -1.58 78.04 -5.54
URC+SSE+SLE (no CD) 73.90 -3.72 75.52 -8.06
URC+SSE (no CD, SLE) 72.48 -5.14 72.36 -11.22
w/ URC (URC only) 70.10 -7.52 71.98 -11.60
w/o URC 76.82 -0.80 70.18 -13.40
the subtask predictors, and the subtask decomposer), then
continue serving with the updated checkpoints. In Table 5,
generalization accuracy without CFT is reported as-is; accu-
racy with CFT is shown in parentheses. On training data, es-
timator accuracy is consistently high (82.1–84.1%). Without
CFT, generalization accuracy remains strong (75.1–77.9%);
with CFT (in parentheses) it improves to 78.1–81.3%, a +3–4%
gain. Latency-wise, the subtask predictors dominate estima-
tor compute when invoked (SPSLM 42.4%, SPLLM 38.8%), while
URC, the Distance Predictor, and the Convergence Detector
are lightweight (6.4%, 7.1%, and 5.3%), enabling fast decisions.
Table 5. Performance of AIMS’s estimators.
Component
Accuracy (%) Lat.
Train Generalization ratio
User Request Classifier 84.1 77.9 (81.3) 6.4%
Subtask Predictor 𝑆𝑃𝑆𝐿𝑀 83.9 76.1 (80.1) 42.4%
Subtask Predictor 𝑆𝑃𝐿𝐿𝑀 82.1 75.1 (78.1) 38.8%
Distance Predictor 83.6 76.2 (79.4) 7.1%
Convergence Detector 82.4 75.8 (79.1) 5.3%
Training: WorFBench, GSM8K; Generalization: Other benchmarks
1872
0.5
0.58
0.62
0.66 0.7
0.74
0.78
τ_req
74%
75%
76%
77%
78%
Accuracy
Accuracy SLM usage
76%
78%
80%
82%
84%
86%
88%
SLM
Usage
(a) Impact of 𝜏𝑟𝑒𝑞
0.6
0.66 0.7
0.74 0.8
τ_sse
74%
75%
76%
77%
78%
Accuracy
Accuracy SLM usage
78%
80%
82%
84%
86%
88%
SLM
Usage
(b) Impact of 𝜏𝑠𝑠𝑒
Figure 12. Sensitivity of AIMS on its parameters.
Table 6. Comparison of mechanisms in AIMS, HybridLLM, and Minions.
HybridLLM [8] Minions [31] AIMS
Core idea classifier-based routing confidence-based routing adaptive iteration-level routing
Decision granularity per subtask (independent) per subtask (independent) per subtask (dependency-aware)
Position-aware routing No No Yes (adaptive 𝜅(𝑖))
Dependency handling No No Yes (subtask prediction + convergence detector
+ subtask decomposition)
4.6 Sensitivity Testing
We analyze two routing thresholds with macro averages
across datasets: the request-level threshold 𝜏req (Fig. 12a) and
the subtask-similarity threshold 𝜏sse (Fig. 12b). Both exhibit
a monotonic trade-off: as the threshold increases, accuracy
rises while SLM usage falls.
Request threshold (𝜏req). Sweeping from 0.50 to 0.78 in-
creases accuracy from 74.25% to 77.90% (+3.65%) while reduc-
ing SLM usage from 88.40% to 76.30% (–12.10%). A balanced
operating point is 𝜏req ∈ [0.66, 0.70], which keeps accuracy
≥77.10% with SLM usage ≈79–81%.
Subtask similarity (𝜏sse). Sweeping from 0.60 to 0.80 in-
creases accuracy from 75.10% to 77.65% (+2.55%) while re-
ducing SLM usage from 86.20% to 78.55% (–7.65%). The knee
appears around 𝜏sse ∈ [0.70, 0.74], offering near-max accu-
racy at materially higher SLM share than more conservative
settings. Overall, higher thresholds push AIMS toward con-
servative routing (more LLM), improving accuracy at the
cost of SLM efficiency; mid-range values deliver the best
accuracy–SLM balance for both thresholds.
4.7 Understanding Performance Gains
To explain the performance gains of AIMS over HybridLLM
and Minions in Section 4.2, we analyze where the baselines
lose accuracy or cost-efficiency relative to AIMS.
Mechanism Comparison. Table 6 compares AIMS, Hy-
bridLLM, and Minions in terms of their mechanisms. Hy-
bridLLM uses classifier-based routing, where an ML clas-
sifier forwards each subtask to an SLM or LLM. Minions
uses confidence-based routing: an SLM first attempts a sub-
task and escalates to a cloud LLM if confidence is low. Both
handle subtasks independently, ignoring subtask position or
dependencies. In contrast, AIMS uses adaptive iteration-level
routing that is position- and workflow-aware: it considers
how routing decisions affect subsequent subtasks, becomes
more conservative for later subtasks, and incorporates con-
vergence detection and subtask decomposition to achieve
high accuracy and cost-efficiency. These differences are crit-
ical because subtasks are interdependent; an early routing
mistake can affect the final result, and late-stage subtasks
are often most accuracy-sensitive.
Experiment Results Analysis. In our experiments in Sec-
tion 4.2, for each request, we record the sequence of subtasks
generated by the agent along with the routing decision (SLM
or LLM) made at each step by each method. To better un-
derstand the behavioral differences among the methods, we
analyze the execution traces of 100 requests, where AIMS
successfully outputs correct results but both HybridLLM and
Minions produce incorrect results. An incorrect result is de-
fined as a final output that fails the task-specific correctness
criterion (Section 2.1), e.g., incorrect final answer, failed test
case, or similarity score below a threshold. By comparing
routing decisions and subtask sequences across the three
1873
methods, we identify two main trace patterns that explain
why the baselines fail while AIMS succeeds.
• Early divergence accumulation: An early subtask
may appear simple, leading Minions and HybridLLM
to offload it to the SLM. However, the resulting state
change can alter subsequent subtasks, causing the
downstream subtask chain to drift. AIMS mitigates
this by checking the predicted subtask’s SLM-LLM
output similarity in making routing decision and by
searching for future convergence when the SLM-LLM
output similarity is high.
• Late-stage sensitivity: In tasks with long subtask
sequences, such as WebArena and ToolBench, later
subtasks often involve final action selection, argument
validation, or consistency checks. HybridLLM and Min-
ions do not consider subtask position, leading to ag-
gressive late-stage offloading where divergence is more
impactful, producing incorrect final results. AIMS ad-
dresses this by tightening its similarity threshold for
later subtasks, favoring LLM to ensure accuracy.
Performance Difference Breakdown. We consider Hy-
bridLLM or Minions to exhibit performance differences when
they either produce an incorrect final outcome or produce a
correct final outcome but require more cloud LLM invoca-
tions than AIMS, resulting in lower SLM usage and higher
cost. For each performance difference case, we analyze the
routing decisions and resulting subtask sequences to identify
the dominant cause among three categories: early divergence
accumulation, late-stage sensitivity, and lack of convergence
and decomposition handling. The first two categories corre-
spond to incorrect final outcomes and are explained in the
previous paragraph, while the third category corresponds
to cases with correct final outcomes but higher cost, where
the baseline incurs more cloud LLM invocations because
it cannot exploit convergence or decomposition opportuni-
ties used by AIMS. We analyze 150 cases and calculate the
percentage of each cause among these cases for each method.
For HybridLLM, the gap relative to AIMS is dominated
by early divergence accumulation (53.18%), followed by late-
stage sensitivity (29.64%) and lack of convergence and decom-
position handling (17.18%). For Minions, late-stage sensitiv-
ity dominates (45.86%), with early divergence accumulation
(30.07%) and lack of convergence and decomposition han-
dling (24.07%). These patterns align with the mechanism
differences summarized in Table 6: both HybridLLM and
Minions treat subtasks independently and lack awareness
of subtask position or dependencies. Overall, AIMS’s advan-
tage comes from accounting for subtask dependencies and
position when offloading subtasks to the SLM, improving
both accuracy and cost-efficiency.
5 Limitations and Future Work
While AIMS demonstrates promising results in balancing
cost-effectiveness and accuracy for AI agent deployment,
several limitations warrant further research:
Application-specific accuracy requirements. In this pa-
per, we assume a uniform similarity threshold across all
applications. However, different applications may have vary-
ing accuracy requirements, which our approach does not
currently account for. In future work, we aim to extend our
framework to incorporate application-specific accuracy re-
quirements, enabling a more tailored and effective decision-
making process.
Cost model. Our current implementation uses a simplified
cost model focusing primarily on LLM API costs. However,
real-world deployments involve additional considerations.
Future work should develop a more comprehensive model
incorporating dynamic SLA-aware scheduling, resource uti-
lization monitoring, network-aware decision making, and
multi-tenant optimization.
Extensive profiling. The current system requires extensive
profiling of each SLM and LLM pair, which can be time-
consuming and hard to retrain. Future work could explore
more efficient profiling techniques to leverage information
from previously profiled models.
Multi-model extension. While AIMS currently supports
any compatible SLM-LLM pair, as demonstrated with Qwen-
4B/GPT-5 and Gemma3 4B/Claude Sonnet 4, it could be ex-
tended to leverage multiple models simultaneously.
Making AIMS SLA-aware. The current AIMS design op-
timizes cloud cost reduction (by maximizing SLM usage)
subject to an accuracy-retention target, and reports latency
empirically rather than enforcing an explicit online budget.
To make AIMS SLA-aware, a deployment could provide per-
request budgets (e.g., a maximum expected remote-token
budget 𝐵$ and/or latency budget 𝐵𝑡 ). AIMS can then tighten
routing thresholds or cap lookahead/convergence search
depth to satisfy 𝐵𝑡 , while prioritizing cloud fallback for late-
stage or high-risk subtasks when the remaining budget is low.
Implementing this requires lightweight runtime signals such
as network RTT, device throughput, and queueing/resource
utilization, enabling budget-aware threshold adaptation and
network-aware routing.
6 Related Work
LLM-based AI Agents. Recent developments in LLMs have
led to a surge in constructing LLM-based autonomous agents
aimed at achieving human-level decision-making capabilities
[2, 58]. Most studies within this domain can be categorized
into three main areas: agent architecture design [37, 45, 46,
59, 60, 62, 67, 70], capability acquisition [42, 44, 54], and
application domains [1, 5, 37, 52, 72]. These works are com-
plementary to our work and have the potential to be included
in AIMS.
1874
In parallel with research on agent architecture, researchers
have been working on agent orchestration frameworks that
make it easier to specify multi-step or graph-structured
agent workflows, manage state, and integrate tool calls (e.g.,
LangGraph [22] and Microsoft Semantic Kernel [29]). These
frameworks primarily focus on agent programming abstrac-
tions and runtime orchestration, and typically assume a fixed
choice of underlying model(s). AIMS is complementary: it
can be integrated underneath these frameworks as a backend
routing layer that decides, at runtime, whether each step/-
subtask should run on an edge SLM or a cloud LLM to reduce
cost while preserving end-to-end accuracy.
Hybrid ML Inference. Recent ML advancements have intro-
duced hybrid inference techniques that strategically combine
models of different sizes to optimize cost and efficiency [3,
8, 11, 13, 20, 34, 49]. These systems typically route simpler
queries to smaller models while directing complex tasks to
larger, more capable ones [3, 7, 19, 20]. The idea of arrang-
ing predictors into a cascade—where cheap stages handle
the common/easy cases and expensive stages are invoked
only for hard cases—predates LLMs and has long been used
in systems and ML pipelines. A classical example is the Vi-
ola–Jones boosted cascade for rapid object/face detection,
which uses early rejectors to avoid unnecessary expensive
computation on most inputs. Modern LLM cascades and
routing systems inherit this same “common-case fast path”
principle, but must additionally account for generation un-
certainty and task semantics [50, 51]. While approaches like
LLM-Blender [19], which ensembles outputs from multiple
LLMs by ranking and fusing them using its PairRanker and
GenFuser modules, and FrugalGPT [3], which queries a cas-
cade of LLMs from least to most expensive until a satisfactory
answer is obtained, utilize multiple LLMs or multiple calls
per request, our method aims to achieve comparable quality
primarily through intelligent routing between a single SLM
and a single LLM per subtask, potentially reducing overall
operational overhead associated with managing and query-
ing numerous models for each request. HybridLLM [8], most
closely related to our work, routes requests between LLM
and SLM using a classifier, whereas AIMS optimizes subtask
allocation within an AI agent’s decision-making process. In
contrast, Minions [31] targets collaboration between an on-
device small model and a remote large model at the subtask
level, using handshakes and gating to recover cloud-only
quality at lower cost. It does not model the internal subtask
structure of agent workflows (decomposition, position ef-
fects), whereas AIMS performs fine-grained, position-aware
routing within a request via its design. Empirically, this struc-
tural awareness lets AIMS sustain higher accuracy at similar
or lower cost while maintaining a higher SLM share on a
variety of tasks.
Recent research has also explored broader LLM inference
optimization challenges like latency, throughput, and re-
source utilization [16, 21, 27, 28, 33, 48, 68]. For instance, Ne-
uPIMs [16] proposes a heterogeneous NPU-PIM architecture
to accelerate batched LLM inference by efficiently handling
different types of matrix operations. PagedAttention [21] op-
timizes memory management for LLM serving by introduc-
ing a paging mechanism for the KV cache. SpecInfer [27] ac-
celerates LLM serving through speculative inference. Other
works have focused on efficient scheduling [28, 33], pipeline
parallelism and recomputation [48], and distributed serving
systems [68], all aiming to improve latency, throughput, and
resource utilization in LLM inference.
7 Conclusion
Motivated by the need to reduce LLM inference costs while
maintaining response accuracy in AI agents, this paper presents
an experimental analysis that yields several insightful ob-
servations. Based on these findings, we propose AIMS, a
cost-efficient framework for AI agents in hybrid cloud-edge
environments. AIMS leverages local SLMs for request- and
subtask-level computation partitioning. Unlike existing ap-
proaches that allocate requests in isolation, AIMS takes a
holistic approach, leveraging subtask position-aware deci-
sions to account for the interconnected nature of agent rea-
soning and identifies convergence points between LLM and
SLM subtask sequences to enhance local processing. Exten-
sive experiments on nine datasets demonstrate that AIMS
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in achieving this bal-
ance.
Acknowledgements
We thank our shepherd, Dr. Y. Charlie Hu, and the anony-
mous reviewers for their valuable feedback and suggestions
that helped improve this paper. This research was supported
in part by U.S. NSF grants NSF-2421782, NSF-2350425, NSF-
2319988, NSF-2206522, Microsoft Research Faculty Fellow-
ship 8300751, Amazon research award, AWS Cloud Credit
for Research, and the Commonwealth Cyber Initiative (CCI),
an investment in the advancement of cyber research, inno-
vation and workforce development. For more information
about CCI, visit cyberinitiative.org.
References
[1] Andres M Bran, Sam Cox, Andrew D White, and Philippe Schwaller.
Chemcrow: Augmenting large-language models with chemistry tools.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05376, 2023.
[2] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse,
Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are few-shot learners.
In Hugo Larochelle, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Raia Hadsell, Maria-Florina
1875
Balcan, and Hsuan-Tien Lin, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 33: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 2020, NeurIPS 2020, December 6-12, 2020, virtual, 2020.
[3] Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. Frugalgpt: How to use
large language models while reducing cost and improving performance.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05176, 2023.
[4] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pondé
de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas
Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger,
Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke
Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz
Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Fe-
lipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios
Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss,
Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin,
Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, An-
drew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa,
Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie
Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish,
Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language
models trained on code. CoRR, abs/2107.03374, 2021.
[5] Yinfang Chen, Huaibing Xie, Minghua Ma, Yu Kang, Xin Gao, Liu Shi,
Yunjie Cao, Xuedong Gao, Hao Fan, Ming Wen, Jun Zeng, Supriyo
Ghosh, Xuchao Zhang, Chaoyun Zhang, Qingwei Lin, Saravan Rajmo-
han, Dongmei Zhang, and Tianyin Xu. Automatic root cause analysis
via large language models for cloud incidents. In Proceedings of the
Nineteenth European Conference on Computer Systems, EuroSys ’24,
page 674–688, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[6] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Hee-
woo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton,
Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve math word problems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
[7] Dujian Ding, Sihem Amer-Yahia, and Laks VS Lakshmanan. On ef-
ficient approximate queries over machine learning models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2206.02845, 2022.
[8] Dujian Ding, Ankur Mallick, Chi Wang, Robert Sim, Subhabrata
Mukherjee, Victor Rühle, Laks VS Lakshmanan, and Ahmed Hassan
Awadallah. Hybrid llm: Cost-efficient and quality-aware query routing.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[9] Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky,
Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Drop: A reading comprehension
benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1903.00161, 2019.
[10] Exploding Topics. Chatgpt enterprise: The future of ai in business.
https://explodingtopics.com/blog/chatgpt-enterprise, 2025. Accessed:
Mar. 6, 2026.
[11] Ruibo Fan, Xiangrui Yu, Peijie Dong, Zeyu Li, Gu Gong, Qiang Wang,
Wei Wang, and Xiaowen Chu. Spinfer: Leveraging low-level sparsity
for efficient large language model inference on gpus. In Proceedings of
the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems, EuroSys ’25,
page 243–260, New York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing
Machinery.
[12] Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Litu Ou, Ashish Sabharwal, and Tushar Khot. Spe-
cializing smaller language models towards multi-step reasoning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10421–10430.
PMLR, 2023.
[13] Shiwei Gao, Youmin Chen, and Jiwu Shu. Fast state restoration in
llm serving with hcache. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European
Conference on Computer Systems, EuroSys ’25, page 128–143, New
York, NY, USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery.
[14] Thorsten Händler. Balancing autonomy and alignment: A multi-
dimensional taxonomy for autonomous llm-powered multi-agent ar-
chitectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03659, 2023.
[15] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven
Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring mathe-
matical problem solving with the MATH dataset. CoRR, abs/2103.03874,
2021.
[16] Guseul Heo, Sangyeop Lee, Jaehong Cho, Hyunmin Choi, Sanghyeon
Lee, Hyungkyu Ham, Gwangsun Kim, Divya Mahajan, and Jongse
Park. Neupims: Npu-pim heterogeneous acceleration for batched llm
inferencing. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 3, pages 722–737, 2024.
[17] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi
Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adapta-
tion of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685, 2021.
[18] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated design of agentic
systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435, 2024.
[19] Dongfu Jiang, Xiang Ren, and Bill Yuchen Lin. LLM-blender: Ensem-
bling large language models with pairwise ranking and generative
fusion. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki,
editors, Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 14165–14178,
Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[20] Anil Kag and Igor Fedorov. Efficient edge inference by selective query.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[21] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
Efficient memory management for large language model serving with
pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, pages 611–626, 2023.
[22] LangChain AI. Langgraph: A low-level orchestration framework for
building stateful agents. https://github.com/langchain-ai/langgraph,
2024. Accessed: Mar. 6, 2026.
[23] Yifei Li, Zeqi Lin, Shizhuo Zhang, Qiang Fu, Bei Chen, Jian-Guang
Lou, and Weizhu Chen. Making language models better reasoners
with step-aware verifier. In Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber, and
Naoaki Okazaki, editors, Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL
2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, pages 5315–5333. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
[24] Yaobo Liang, Chenfei Wu, Ting Song, Wenshan Wu, Yan Xia, Yu Liu,
Yang Ou, Shuai Lu, Lei Ji, Shaoguang Mao, Yun Wang, Linjun Shou,
Ming Gong, and Nan Duan. Taskmatrix.ai: Completing tasks by con-
necting foundation models with millions of apis. Intelligent Computing,
3:0063, 2024.
[25] Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang,
Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: plug-
and-play compositional reasoning with large language models. In
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2023. Curran
Associates Inc.
[26] Grégoire Mialon, Roberto Dessì, Maria Lomeli, Christoforos Nalmpan-
tis, Ram Pasunuru, Roberta Raileanu, Baptiste Rozière, Timo Schick,
Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Asli Celikyilmaz, et al. Augmented language models:
a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07842, 2023.
[27] Xupeng Miao, Gabriele Oliaro, Zhihao Zhang, Xinhao Cheng, Zeyu
Wang, Zhengxin Zhang, Rae Ying Yee Wong, Alan Zhu, Lijie Yang,
Xiaoxiang Shi, et al. Specinfer: Accelerating large language model
serving with tree-based speculative inference and verification. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3,
pages 932–949, 2024.
[28] Xupeng Miao, Chunan Shi, Jiangfei Duan, Xiaoli Xi, Dahua Lin, Bin Cui,
and Zhihao Jia. Spotserve: Serving generative large language models
on preemptible instances. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
1876
Operating Systems, Volume 2, pages 1112–1127, 2024.
[29] Microsoft. Semantic Kernel: An open-source SDK for integrating LLMs
into applications. https://github.com/microsoft/semantic-kernel, 2023.
Accessed: 2025.
[30] Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang,
Christina Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju,
William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering
with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
[31] Avanika Narayan, Dan Biderman, Sabri Eyuboglu, Avner May, Scott
Linderman, James Zou, and Christopher Re. Minions: Cost-efficient
collaboration between on-device and cloud language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.15964, 2025.
[32] Neoteric. How much does it cost to use gpt models? gpt-3 pricing
explained. https://neoteric.eu/blog/how-much-does-it-cost-to-use-
gpt-models-gpt-3-pricing-explained/, 2023. Accessed: Mar. 6, 2026.
[33] Hyungjun Oh, Kihong Kim, Jaemin Kim, Sungkyun Kim, Junyeol Lee,
Du-seong Chang, and Jiwon Seo. Exegpt: Constraint-aware resource
scheduling for llm inference. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems, Volume 2, pages 369–384, 2024.
[34] Isaac Ong, Amjad Almahairi, Vincent Wu, Wei-Lin Chiang, Tian-
hao Wu, Joseph E Gonzalez, M Waleed Kadous, and Ion Stoica.
Routellm: Learning to route llms with preference data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.18665, 2024.
[35] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wain-
wright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina
Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instruc-
tions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
[36] Haritz Puerto, Gözde Şahin, and Iryna Gurevych. MetaQA: Combining
expert agents for multi-skill question answering. In Andreas Vlachos
and Isabelle Augenstein, editors, Proceedings of the 17th Conference
of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, pages 3566–3580, Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2023. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[37] Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao
Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, Juyuan Xu, Da-
hai Li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. ChatDev: Communicative
agents for software development. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and
Vivek Srikumar, editors, Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 15174–15186, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[38] Shuofei Qiao, Runnan Fang, Zhisong Qiu, Xiaobin Wang, Ningyu
Zhang, Yong Jiang, Pengjun Xie, Fei Huang, and Huajun Chen. Bench-
marking agentic workflow generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07869,
2024.
[39] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu,
Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facili-
tating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.16789, 2023.
[40] Leonardo Ranaldi and André Freitas. Aligning large and small language
models via chain-of-thought reasoning. In Yvette Graham and Matthew
Purver, editors, Proceedings of the 18th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, EACL 2024
- Volume 1: Long Papers, St. Julian’s, Malta, March 17-22, 2024, pages
1812–1827. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2024.
[41] Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embed-
dings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang,
Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan, editors, Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th
International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP), pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
[42] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria
Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas
Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use
tools. In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Globerson, Kate Saenko,
Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine, editors, Advances in Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans, LA, USA, December
10 - 16, 2023, 2023.
[43] SemiAnalysis. The inference cost of search disruption – large lan-
guage model cost analysis. https://semianalysis.com/2023/02/09/the-
inference-cost-of-search-disruption/, 2023. Accessed: Mar. 6, 2026.
[44] Yongliang Shen, Kaitao Song, Xu Tan, Dongsheng Li, Weiming Lu, and
Yueting Zhuang. Hugginggpt: Solving AI tasks with chatgpt and its
friends in hugging face. In Alice Oh, Tristan Naumann, Amir Glober-
son, Kate Saenko, Moritz Hardt, and Sergey Levine, editors, Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems 2023, NeurIPS 2023, New Orleans,
LA, USA, December 10 - 16, 2023, 2023.
[45] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik R
Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with ver-
bal reinforcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[46] Significant Gravitas. Autogpt. https://github.com/Significant-
Gravitas/AutoGPT, 2023. Accessed: Mar. 6, 2026.
[47] Theodore Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Thomas
Griffiths. Cognitive architectures for language agents. Transactions on
Machine Learning Research, 2024. Survey Certification.
[48] Zhenbo Sun, Huanqi Cao, Yuanwei Wang, Guanyu Feng, Shengqi Chen,
Haojie Wang, and Wenguang Chen. Adapipe: Optimizing pipeline
parallelism with adaptive recomputation and partitioning. In Proceed-
ings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3, pages
86–100, 2024.
[49] Zhenbo Sun, Shengqi Chen, Yuanwei Wang, Jian Sha, Guanyu Feng,
and Wenguang Chen. Mepipe: Democratizing llm training with
memory-efficient slice-level pipeline scheduling on cost-effective ac-
celerators. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on
Computer Systems, EuroSys ’25, page 1263–1278, New York, NY, USA,
2025. Association for Computing Machinery.
[50] Paul Viola and Michael Jones. Rapid object detection using a boosted
cascade of simple features. In Proceedings of the 2001 IEEE computer
society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. CVPR
2001, volume 1, pages I–I. IEEE, 2001.
[51] Paul Viola and Michael J Jones. Robust real-time face detection. Inter-
national journal of computer vision, 57(2):137–154, 2004.
[52] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei
Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An
open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Transactions
on Machine Learning Research, 2024.
[53] Kuan Wang, Yadong Lu, Michael Santacroce, Yeyun Gong, Chao Zhang,
et al. Adapting llm agents with universal feedback in communication.
In ICML 2024 Workshop on Foundation Models in the Wild, 2024.
[54] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen
Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A
survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers
of Computer Science, 18(6):1–26, 2024.
[55] Benjamin Warner, Antoine Chaffin, Benjamin Clavié, Orion Weller,
Oskar Hallström, Said Taghadouini, Alexis Gallagher, Raja Biswas,
Faisal Ladhak, Tom Aarsen, Griffin Thomas Adams, Jeremy Howard,
and Iacopo Poli. Smarter, better, faster, longer: A modern bidirectional
encoder for fast, memory efficient, and long context finetuning and
inference. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and
Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors, Proceedings of the 63rd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
1877
Long Papers), pages 2526–2547, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[56] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei
Yu, Brian Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned
language models are zero-shot learners. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2022.
[57] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebas-
tian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald
Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang,
Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language
models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2022. Survey
Certification.
[58] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian
Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-
thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In
Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, K. Cho,
and A. Oh, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2022,
NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 28 - December 9, 2022,
2022.
[59] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li,
Erkang (Eric) Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Ahmed
Awadallah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. Autogen:
Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation. In
COLM 2024, August 2024.
[60] Wenshan Wu, Shaoguang Mao, Yadong Zhang, Yan Xia, Li Dong, Lei
Cui, and Furu Wei. Mind’s eye of llms: Visualization-of-thought elic-
its spatial reasoning in large language models. In Amir Globersons,
Lester Mackey, Danielle Belgrave, Angela Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M.
Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December
10 - 15, 2024, 2024.
[61] Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang
Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. The
rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864, 2023.
[62] Binfeng Xu, Zhiyuan Peng, Bowen Lei, Subhabrata Mukherjee, Yuchen
Liu, and Dongkuan Xu. Rewoo: Decoupling reasoning from obser-
vations for efficient augmented language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.18323, 2023.
[63] Canwen Xu, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang, Yang Liu, Chenguang Zhu,
and Julian McAuley. Small models are valuable plug-ins for large
language models. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar,
editors, Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL
2024, pages 283–294, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[64] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui,
Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al.
Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
[65] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William Cohen,
Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christopher D. Manning. HotpotQA: A
dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. In Ellen
Riloff, David Chiang, Julia Hockenmaier, and Jun’ichi Tsujii, editors,
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 2369–2380, Brussels, Belgium, October-
November 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[66] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik Narasimhan. Web-
shop: Towards scalable real-world web interaction with grounded
language agents. In Sanmi Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, Danielle
Belgrave, K. Cho, and A. Oh, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 35: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA, November
28 - December 9, 2022, 2022.
[67] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik
Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting
in language models. CoRR, abs/2210.03629, 2022.
[68] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim,
and Byung-Gon Chun. Orca: A distributed serving system for
{Transformer-Based} generative models. In 16th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22), pages
521–538, 2022.
[69] Tianyi Zhang*, Varsha Kishore*, Felix Wu*, Kilian Q. Weinberger, and
Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[70] Yadong Zhang, Shaoguang Mao, Tao Ge, Xun Wang, Yan Xia, Man Lan,
and Furu Wei. K-level reasoning: Establishing higher order beliefs in
large language models for strategic reasoning. In Luis Chiruzzo, Alan
Ritter, and Lu Wang, editors, Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the
Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 7212–7234, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[71] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek
Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al.
Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854, 2023.
[72] Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu
Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in
the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world enviroments
via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.
1878
