2026 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) | 979-8-3315-9302-5/26/$31.00 ©2026 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/HPCA68181.2026.11408493

PASCAL: A Phase-Aware Scheduling Algorithm for
Serving Reasoning-based Large Language Models
Eunyeong Cho

Jehyeon Bang

Ranggi Hwang∗

Minsoo Rhu

KAIST
eunyeong.cho@kaist.ac.kr

KAIST
jehyeon.bang@kaist.ac.kr

UNIST
ranggi.hwang@unist.ac.kr

KAIST
mrhu@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract—The emergence of reasoning-based LLMs leveraging Chain-of-Thought (CoT) inference introduces new serving
challenges, as their extended reasoning phases delay user-visible
output and inflate Time-To-First-Token (TTFT). Existing LLM
serving frameworks fail to distinguish between reasoning and
answering phases, leading to performance degradation under
GPU memory constraints. We present PASCAL, a phase-aware
scheduling algorithm that prioritizes reasoning to reduce TTFT
while using controlled preemption and token pacing during
answering to preserve Quality-of-Experience (QoE). Our hierarchical scheduler combines instance-level placement with intrainstance execution and enables dynamic migration at phase
boundaries to balance load and reduce interference. Across
benchmarks using DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B, PASCAL reduces tail TTFT by up to 72% while maintaining answering
phase SLO attainment, demonstrating the importance of phaseaware scheduling for reasoning-based LLM deployment.
Index Terms—Serving system, reasoning-based LLMs, scheduling framework, user experience.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) [5], [8], [15], [37] have
emerged as powerful tools for various natural language processing tasks. As these models evolve, their deployment for
real-time applications has become increasingly important, with
a particular focus on inference efficiency and user experience.
In LLM inference, user experience is significantly influenced
by two key performance metrics. Time-To-First-Token (TTFT)
measures the latency between the query submission time and
the time the first response token is received. Time-Per-OutputToken (TPOT), on the other hand, measures the generation
speed of each subsequent token. Prior work has established
that these metrics correlate strongly with user satisfaction and
engagement [2], [18], [22], [26], [31], [40], [54], making them
critical design objectives when LLMs are deployed.
These user experience metrics are directly tied to the
underlying computational stages of LLM inference. As shown
in Figure 1(a), conventional LLM inference consists of two
distinct stages: (1) the prefill stage processes the entire input
prompt in a single forward pass and primarily determines
TTFT, while (2) the decoding stage generates tokens autoregressively, directly influencing TPOT. This clear distinction
between stages has enabled prior works to develop targeted
optimization strategies that align the prefill stage and decoding
stage with user satisfaction metrics. Moreover, recent serving
∗ Work done while at KAIST.

: Prefill stage

: Decoding stage, reasoning phase

: Decoding stage, answering phase

TTFT
Input
prompt

TPOT

LLM

LLM

LLM

LLM

LLM

LLM

t1

t2

t3

t4

t5

t6

(a) Conventional LLM inference
TTFT
Input
prompt

LLM

r1

TPOT

LLM

LLM

LLM

LLM

LLM

r2

r3

</think>

t1

t2

(b) Reasoning-based LLM inference

Fig. 1: Comparison of how TTFT and TPOT are defined in conventional LLMs versus reasoning-based LLMs. TTFT is the latency between the query submission time and the time the first “user-visible”
response token (t1 ) is received by the user. (a) In conventional LLMs,
this first user-visible token is generated at the end of the prefill stage,
so TTFT equals the prefill-stage latency. (b) In contrast, for reasoningbased LLMs, TTFT is the sum of the prefill-stage latency, the latency
of the reasoning phase, and the latency from the end of the reasoning
phase to the generation of the first answering token.

systems leverage the distinct computational characteristics of
the prefill and decoding stages to better meet service-level
objectives (SLOs) for TTFT and TPOT through disaggregated
execution of prefill and decoding stage. [34], [39], [43], [54].
Although these approaches have been effective for conventional LLMs, the research landscape has evolved significantly
with the emergence of reasoning-based LLMs [16], [28],
[38], [45]. Reasoning models incorporate Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) techniques [12], [46], [47], [49], [50], [55], which have
gained tremendous popularity for their ability to solve complex problems by explicitly generating intermediate reasoning
steps “before” producing final answers. We observe that this
fundamental shift in how models generate outputs introduces
new challenges for inference optimization, as detailed below.
Unlike conventional LLMs, reasoning-based LLMs produce intermediate reasoning tokens that represent step-by-step
problem-solving, followed by answering tokens that convey
the final outcome (Figure 1(b)). This distinction disrupts the
conventional relationship between performance metrics (i.e.,
TTFT and TPOT) and the serving pipeline stages (i.e., prefill
and decoding stages). Specifically, in reasoning-based LLMs,
the decoding stage itself is divided into two functionally
distinct phases: a reasoning phase, where reasoning tokens
are generated, and an answering phase that produces the
final answering tokens. The key insight here is that the
performance and SLO requirements differ between these two
phases. Because the user does not require direct insight into

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the model’s internal reasoning tokens, the top priority is to
expedite the reasoning phase as fast as possible, reducing the
time it takes to generate the model’s reasoning tokens before
the final answering tokens start streaming in. By minimizing
the reasoning phase latency, the serving system can begin
transmitting the user-visible tokens (i.e., the answering tokens)
earlier, improving the user-perceived responsiveness by minimizing the latency to generate the first meaningful answering
token. In contrast, the answering phase just has to be “fast
enough” to ensure a smooth and prompt user experience, as
it can tolerate somewhat looser throughput targets compared
to the user-hidden reasoning phase. In other words, once
the user begins seeing the answering tokens, maintaining a
modestly high streaming rate is often sufficient for good user
experience. Overall, TTFT in a reasoning model effectively
encompasses not only the prefill stage but also the decoding
stage of potentially numerous intermediate reasoning tokens
(which are not necessary for the user to comprehend the final
answer) and the latency from the end of the reasoning phase
to the generation of the first answering token (Figure 1(b)).
To this end, we present PASCAL, a phase-aware scheduling
algorithm that optimizes the distinct requirements of the
reasoning and answering phases to enhance user experience
while maintaining serving throughput. Our characterization of
reasoning-based LLMs reveals the following key observations
where (1) the absolute latency of the decoding stage, which directly impacts the reasoning model’s TTFT, is highly sensitive
to interruptions in the execution pipeline, while (2) its TPOT
requirements can be maintained much more robustly with
greater scheduling flexibility. Building on this insight, PASCAL
introduces a phase-aware, hierarchical scheduling architecture.
Our proposal explicitly partitions the decoding stage into
reasoning and answering phases, applies distinct scheduling
priorities to each, and enables instance-level load balancing to
address the unique challenges of serving reasoning models.
Through extensive evaluation on state-of-the-art reasoningbased LLMs, we show that PASCAL not only reduces the time
to first answering token but also preserves or improves SLO
satisfaction during the answering phase.
II. BACKGROUND
A. LLM Serving Metrics and Execution Phases
LLM serving systems are commonly evaluated using two
critical performance metrics: Time-To-First-Token (TTFT),
which measures how quickly a user receives the first generated
token, and Time-Per-Output-Token (TPOT), which quantifies
the generation speed once decoding begins. These metrics
correspond to distinct points in the response timeline, aligning
with the two computational stages of LLM inference: the
prefill and decoding stages (Figure 1(a)).
During the prefill stage, the model processes the entire
input prompt in a single pass, generating key-value (KV)
representations (referred to as KV caches) for all tokens,
and generating one output token (e.g., t1 in Figure 1(a)).
This stage is compute-intensive, exhibits high parallelism, and

directly determines TTFT in conventional LLMs. The subsequent decoding stage auto-regressively generates output tokens
by reusing the KV caches and incrementally updating them
with each newly generated token. This stage is known to be
memory-bandwidth-bound and determines TPOT. In practice,
LLM serving systems define a service-level objective (SLO)
to ensure a responsive user experience, typically targeting a
TTFT of a few seconds or less and a TPOT of 5–10 tokens
per second to align with human reading speeds [18], [31], [54].
B. Need for Blocking & Preempting Requests in LLM Serving
Modern LLM serving systems employ continuous batching [51], where new inference requests are incrementally
added to the currently running batch at each decoding step.
During decoding, however, the KV cache grows as new tokens
are generated. Given limited GPU memory, the number of concurrent requests that can be batched is therefore constrained
by the cumulative KV cache footprint [4], [7], [42], [52],
[53]. Consequently, when GPU memory becomes saturated,
the serving system must either block newly arriving requests
or preempt (evict) in-flight requests to free GPU memory.
Concretely, blocking occurs when an incoming request cannot
be scheduled due to insufficient memory; it waits in the
queue until enough KV cache space is released by completing
requests. Because execution cannot begin until admission, this
queuing delay inflates the request’s TTFT. Preemption, in
contrast, temporarily evicts an executing request; its KV cache
is offloaded to CPU memory and execution is suspended. The
request later resumes once sufficient GPU memory becomes
available, reloading its KV cache to the GPU. Since preemption halts token generation, it increases TPOT.
C. LLM Scheduling Policy
An LLM serving system’s scheduling policy determines
which requests’ KV caches can remain resident in GPU
memory and which should be blocked or preempted (and
thus offloaded) to preserve GPU memory space. Early systems
such as vLLM [27] rely on a simple First-Come-First-Served
(FCFS) scheduling policy that batches requests in arrival order.
When GPU memory is exhausted under FCFS, the most
recently arrived requests are preempted by offloading their KV
caches to CPU memory. FCFS then blocks incoming requests
until GPU memory becomes available, and preempted requests
are resumed after their KV caches are reloaded from CPU to
GPU memory. This mechanism significantly impacts TTFT, as
new requests must wait for memory to free up, suffering from
Head-of-Line (HoL) blocking where earlier long-running requests delay the servicing of later ones. Figure 2(a) illustrates
an ideal scenario without GPU memory constraints, where
Request C can be immediately batched with earlier requests. In
contrast, Figure 2(b) shows a case where Request C must wait
for Requests A and B to complete, resulting in an excessive
TTFT of 7 time units. This is particularly problematic, as
modern LLM serving systems define SLOs for both TTFT and
TPOT to ensure responsiveness. FCFS inherently increases the

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

N : N-th decoding step

Request A

1

Request B
Request C
0

Request A

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Request B

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Request C

5

(a) Oracular execution with infinite GPU memory

Time

1

: Preempted

: Waiting

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

0

5

Request A
8

Request B

1

Request C
Time

(b) FCFS scheduling

1

2

3

4

1

2

3

6

7

2

3

4

8
5

1
0

5
4

5

Time

(c) Round robin scheduling with token quantum of 4

Fig. 2: Timeline illustrating how the serving system handles requests under three different scenarios. We assume that Request A, B, and
C arrive at times 0, 1, and 2, respectively, and that the GPU memory capacity allows at most two requests to be batched simultaneously.
(a) With oracular execution under infinite GPU memory, there is no limit on how many requests can be batched, so each request begins
execution immediately upon arrival, and no preemption occurs. (b) Under FCFS scheduling, the first two requests (A and B) are batched,
while C must wait. Request C joins the batch only after A finishes decoding, yielding a TTFT of 7 time units. (c) In round-robin (RR)
scheduling, each request decodes a fixed quantum of four tokens before being preempted. Request C waits for 2 time units, joins the batch
when Request A is preempted at time 4, and is itself preempted after producing four tokens at time 8.

To address this limitation, recent work proposes various
SLO-aware schedulers [14], [26], [31], [48]. One line of
this research explores time-sharing within a single serving
instance. In this context, a serving instance is the software
abstraction in LLM serving frameworks that serves as the unit
of execution and manages a replica of the model weights,
coordinating access to shared GPU resources. Time-sharing
schedulers [26], [31], [48] utilize preemption to allocate GPU
time slices to concurrent requests, preventing any single longrunning request from monopolizing the GPU memory. In
addition to mitigating HoL blocking and improving TTFT,
these approaches also help maintain acceptable TPOT by
enabling fair resource allocation during decoding. A canonical
example of time-sharing scheduler is the classical round-robin
(RR) algorithm. In this approach, the scheduler assigns each
request a fixed token quantum. Once a request consumes all
its assigned quantum, its scheduling priority is lowered. If
the GPU memory becomes limited, the scheduler can preempt
the lowest-priority requests by offloading their KV caches to
CPU memory. This frees up memory, allowing newly arrived
requests to be admitted into the batch and begin decoding,
thereby reducing their TTFT. More advanced schedulers are
based on the same key insight, with priorities determined by
different heuristics, for example, the likelihood of SLO violation [31], the number of generated tokens per request [26], or
estimated completion deadlines [48]. As shown in Figure 2(c),
the earliest request, Request A, is preempted by the scheduler
after generating a predefined token quantum (4 tokens in this
example). This frees sufficient memory for Request C to join
the batch and generate its first token within 3 time units.
An unfortunate side effect of time-sharing schedulers is
that they can cause irregular token-generation rates. In Figure 2(c), for instance, Request B is preempted for 3 time
units, increasing the latency between its fourth and fifth tokens
and potentially degrading user experience. Prior work [31]
addresses this issue using a token pacer. The token pacer
temporarily buffers tokens when they are generated in bursts
and tries to release them at a steady rate whenever the request
is idle due to preemption, thereby smoothing the output rate
perceived by the user. To quantitatively measure how well

System generated

# of tokens

risk of violating TTFT objectives due to HoL blocking under
GPU memory pressure.

30

(i)

20

User digested

Target
TTFT

10

(iii)

0
0

User expected

(ii)

5

10

(iv)
15

20

Time

Fig. 3: An example token serving scenario with QoE measurement,
where token delivery begins at the target TTFT without additional
delay. (i) The serving system initially generates tokens (red line)
faster than the user’s expected reading pace (black dotted line),
causing tokens to be buffered by the token pacer. The user consumes
tokens at their own pace, represented by the user digested line
(yellow). (ii) When the serving system is temporarily paused, the user
continues consuming the buffered tokens. (iii) Once all the tokens
kept in the buffer are depleted, the user experiences starvation until
token generation resumes. (iv) Once token generation resumes, the
user continues consuming tokens at a steady pace, although the user’s
token digestion timeline remains behind the expected schedule due to
the earlier delay experienced when the serving system paused. QoE
is measured by computing the ratio between the area under the user
digested token curve (yellow) and the area under the user expected
curve (black dotted line).

the serving system’s token generation rate aligns with the
user’s token consumption rate, [31] introduced the Qualityof-Experience (QoE) metric, which more accurately reflects
SLO attainment than the conventional average TPOT measure.
QoE combines two factors: (1) whether each request meets
the target TTFT, and (2) how closely the effective token generation speed delivered to the user matches the target TPOT,
accounting for the effects of token pacing. Figure 3 illustrates
how QoE is measured, which reflects how closely the token
generation rate aligns with the user’s expected responsiveness.
QoE is normalized to the interval [0,1] and a score of 1
indicates perfect alignment, while lower values suggest delays
or starvation in token delivery (e.g., the example in Figure 3
exhibits a QoE value less than 1 due to the lagging of token
digestion timeline vs. the user expected timeline).
D. Rethinking TTFT and TPOT in Reasoning-Based LLMs
Reasoning-based LLMs generate more accurate responses
and solve complex problems by incorporating techniques
like Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [46], [47], [50], [55], in which
models explicitly work through intermediate reasoning steps
before arriving at final answers. This approach mimics human

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. C HARACTERIZATION AND M OTIVATION
A. Methodology
This section characterizes how different scheduling policies
impact reasoning-based LLM inference. We present key insights that inform efficient scheduling decisions for reasoningbased LLMs, with a particular focus on optimizing user
experience. All experiments in this section were conducted
on a server node hosted by Intel Xeon Platinum 8558 CPU
(with 256 GB DDR5 DIMM) communicating with an NVIDIA
H100 GPU (with 96 GB HBM) communicating over PCIe 5.0.
For LLM serving, we employ vLLM v0.6.1 [27].
Workload. We conducted experiments using DeepSeek-R1Distill-Qwen-32B [9], [16], an open-source LLM designed

Executed

Waiting (blocked)

Waiting (preempted)

Total latency

200

128

256

512

1024

RR

FCFS

Oracle

RR

FCFS

RR

Oracle

FCFS

RR

Oracle

0
FCFS

50

0
RR

100

2
Oracle

150

4

FCFS

6

Reasoning phase
latency (s)

8

Oracle

Reasoning phase
latency (normalized)

problem-solving by breaking down complex tasks into logical sequences. Over time, several reasoning algorithms have
emerged, ranging from structured approaches such as treestructured reasoning [50] to explicit prompting methods [47].
More recently, the field has converged toward methods in
which the reasoning process is fully integrated into a single
decoding pipeline, exemplified by models such as DeepSeekR1 [16] and OpenAI o3 [38]. These integrated reasoningbased LLMs automatically perform internal deliberation steps
(i.e., the reasoning phase) within the same neural network
architecture and inference process. They employ advanced
training methods that enable the internalization of reasoning
capabilities directly within the model architecture [16], [38].
These fundamental differences from conventional LLMs
affect how serving metrics should be interpreted. In conventional LLMs, TTFT and TPOT map cleanly to two distinct
execution stages: TTFT captures the latency of the prefill
stage, while TPOT measures how quickly output tokens are
generated during the subsequent decoding stage. As illustrated
in Figure 1(a), conventional LLMs generate the first uservisible token (t1 ) immediately after the prefill stage, so TTFT
spans only the grey-colored block. In contrast, reasoning-based
LLMs internally divide the decoding stage into two sub-stages:
(1) a reasoning phase, which generates latent reasoning tokens
not visible to the user, and (2) an answering phase, producing
the user-visible answering tokens. As shown in Figure 1(b), a
reasoning-based LLM first generates reasoning tokens (r1 , r2 ,
and r3 ) before the answering phase begins at t1 . As a result,
the latency to generate these reasoning tokens contributes to
TTFT, even though they occur during decoding. That is, TTFT
of reasoning-based LLMs consists of sum of the prefill-stage
latency, the latency to execute the reasoning phase, and also the
latency from the end of the reasoning phase to the generation
of the first answering token (Figure 1(b)). Consequently, the
decoding stage now contributes to both TTFT (during the
reasoning phase) and TPOT (during the answering phase),
breaking the conventional one-to-one mapping of TTFT to
prefill and TPOT to decode. For the remainder of this paper,
we define the reasoning phase as encompassing both the
prefill stage and the generation of reasoning tokens within the
decoding stage, as both contribute to the latency before the
first answering token becomes visible to the user.

2048

Number of reasoning tokens

Fig. 4: (Left axis) Breakdown of average reasoning phase latency
across oracle, FCFS, and RR scheduling policies for varying numbers
of reasoning tokens (x-axis), normalized to the oracle latency at each
reasoning token count. Executed (black) denotes time the request
actively ran on the GPU without being blocked (red) or preempted
(yellow). (Right axis) Corresponding average absolute latency in
seconds, indicated by green triangles.

for reasoning tasks. To clearly characterize and motivate how
different scheduling decisions affect the SLO metrics of the
reasoning-based LLMs, we construct synthetic workloads as
follows. Two separate experiments are conducted independently, each focusing on either the reasoning phase (Figure 4)
or the answering phase (Figure 5). In each experiment, our
LLM serving system processes a total of 300 requests, with
request arrivals following a Poisson distribution. The first
experiment targets the reasoning phase (Figure 4) where all
requests have a fixed input prompt length of 128 tokens, while
the reasoning token length is randomly selected between 128
and 2048 tokens. This setup allows us to isolate how different
scheduling policies impact the performance of the reasoning
phase under varying reasoning token lengths. In the second
experiment characterizing the answering phase (Figure 5), we
assume that all requests have already completed the execution
of both prefill and the reasoning phase (the combined length
of prefill and reasoning tokens is fixed at 128 tokens), and
that their corresponding KV caches are already generated
during previous execution. Under this setting, each request
generates answering tokens with lengths ranging from 128 to
2048, which is chosen randomly, allowing us to analyze how
different scheduling policies affect SLO attainment during the
answering phase.
Scheduling policy. To demonstrate how GPU memory constraints influence scheduling efficacy, we compare two scenarios: (1) an oracle configuration with sufficient memory to hold
the KV caches of all 300 requests simultaneously, allowing
the scheduler to never have to block or preempt requests
due to GPU memory limits, and (2) a memory-constrained
configuration. In our NVIDIA H100 (96 GB) GPU based system, the full-capacity setting can accommodate all KV caches
concurrently, so we treat it as the oracle configuration with
no performance degradation attributable to memory limits. To
emulate a realistic serving environment with GPU memory
constraints, we cap the GPU memory available for KV cache
allocation to 50% of the oracle capacity and schedule requests
based on FCFS or RR, which will block incoming requests or
preempt ongoing ones once memory is exhausted (Figure 2).

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

256

512

1024

RR

FCFS

RR

Oracle

FCFS

RR

Waiting (preempted)

Oracle

FCFS

RR

Oracle

Waiting (blocked)

FCFS

RR

128

Oracle

FCFS

Oracle

Answering phase
latency (s)

Executed

200
150
100
50
0

2048

Answering phase
SLO attainment

Number of answering tokens
(a)
Oracle

FCFS

RR

100%
50%
0%
128

256

512

1024

2048

Number of answering tokens
(b)

Fig. 5: (a) Answering phase latency breakdown across varying numbers of answering tokens and (b) the corresponding SLO attainment
rate. The SLO target for the answering phase is determined by two
factors: (1) the latency between the end of the reasoning phase and
the generation of the first answering token (henceforth referred to
as Time-To-First-Answering-Token (TTFAT)), and (2) whether the
answering token generation rate meets the TPOT target. As such,
per our definition of QoE in Figure 3, the answering phase’s QoE
is determined by the target values of TTFAT and TPOT. Following
prior work [54], we set the target TTFAT and TPOT values to 0.25
seconds and 100 milliseconds, respectively. A request violates the
SLO if its QoE score falls below 0.95.

B. Characterization
Reasoning phase. Figure 4 illustrates how blocking and
preemption aggravate reasoning phase latency relative to the
oracle scenario (Figure 2(a)). Unlike conventional LLMs
where TTFT is determined solely by the prefill stage,
reasoning-based LLMs produce the first (user-visible) answering token only after all reasoning tokens are generated.
Consequently, TTFT spans not only the prefill stage but also
the entire decoding of reasoning tokens and can far exceed
the sub-second TTFT SLO typical of conventional LLMs,
making timely completion of the reasoning phase critical for
user satisfaction. Figure 4 therefore focuses on how scheduling
policies shape reasoning phase latency under memory sufficiency (oracle) vs. memory pressure (FCFS, RR). As shown,
both blocking (FCFS) and preemption (RR) add directly to
reasoning phase latency, especially when limited GPU memory
prevents uninterrupted execution. Under FCFS, blocking inflates latency because a request must wait behind long-running
ones whose KV caches remain resident until completion. This
effect is most pronounced for short reasoning requests (e.g.,
128 reasoning tokens), where wait time dominates and latency
increases by up to 5.14× over the oracle. In contrast, RR
avoids outright blocking by interleaving requests, but frequent
preemptions fragment execution. For long reasoning requests
(e.g., 2048 reasoning tokens), RR increases latency by up
to 1.75× vs. uninterrupted oracle execution. Because RR
enforces a fixed token quantum, long requests cannot retain
continuous residency of their KV caches in GPU memory, accumulating repeated interruption and waiting intervals. Similar

degradation is expected for other time-sharing policies that
necessarily preempt long requests to preserve fairness.
In summary, both blocking (FCFS) and preemption (RR
and other time-sharing schedulers) during the reasoning phase
substantially delay generation of the first answering token
under GPU memory constraints, severely degrading TTFT and
motivating memory- and phase-aware scheduling strategies.
Answering phase. Figure 5 shows how scheduling policies
affect user experience during the answering phase. Figure 5(a)
shows a breakdown of the latency of answering phase across
varying numbers of answering tokens and Figure 5(b) shows
the corresponding SLO attainment rate. In reasoning-based
LLMs, TTFT is measured as the latency until the “first” answering token is generated. Unlike the reasoning phase, where
any additional delay directly increases TTFT, the answering
phase can still meet its SLO if (1) the latency from the end
of reasoning to the first answering token does not exceed the
Time-To-First-Answering-Token (TTFAT) target, which is set
to be near-instantaneous to ensure an immediate transition
from the reasoning phase to the answering phase, and (2) the
steady-state answering token generation rate meets the TPOT
target (Figure 3)1 . Because SLO satisfaction is thresholdbased rather than minimizing absolute latency (i.e., latencies
only need to be fast enough), appropriate scheduling can
preserve user experience even when execution is fragmented
by blocking or preemption.
Under FCFS, blocking forces requests to wait behind longrunning ones (Figure 5(b)), substantially increasing TTFAT
and lowering SLO attainment across all answering token
lengths (Figure 5(b)). In contrast, RR eliminates head-ofline blocking by interleaving execution, allowing all requests
to start promptly to keep TTFAT low, while also sustaining
adequate token generation rate. Consequently, SLO attainment
remains high for most configurations with RR. Notably, at
2048 answering tokens, RR incurs higher total answering
phase latency than FCFS due to preemptions (Figure 5(a)),
yet achieves the same SLO attainment as the oracle because
both its TTFAT and per-token generation rate remain within
thresholds. This shows that during the answering phase, timesharing policies like RR can tolerate preemption overhead
while still preserving user experience, unlike their detrimental
impact during the reasoning phase, as highlighted in Figure 4.
In summary, answering phase SLOs are robust to moderate
RR-induced preemption overhead as long as threshold metrics
are met, making time-sharing schedulers like RR preferable to
blocking policies like FCFS for this phase.
1 Our target TPOT was selected from a user-centric perspective rather than
being tied to GPU performance or model specifications. This decision is
grounded in the principle that user satisfaction is largely determined by
whether the LLM produces output tokens at a rate comparable to typical
human reading speeds. In other words, even if future GPUs provide 10×
greater compute capability, we do not expect TPOT to decrease proportionally,
as there is little benefit in “over-optimizing” it beyond the threshold of
human perception. Likewise, even with future LLMs that demand 10× more
computation, we expect TPOT to remain within the 100 ms range. Prior
studies [18], [22], [31], [32] have similarly argued that a TPOT of around
100 ms (which is already faster than human reading speeds) is sufficient to
provide a natural, conversational experience.

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

C. Motivation
Our analysis reveals that reasoning and answering respond
very differently to blocking and preemption. In the reasoning
phase, blocking or preemption directly stretches reasoning latency, delaying the generation of the first answering token and
degrading TTFT-driven user experience. In contrast, limited
preemption does not necessarily harm user experience in the
answering phase. As long as the first answering token appears
promptly after reasoning phase’s completion and the steadystate answering token generation rate meets the required
throughput threshold, SLOs remain satisfied even if execution is fragmented. Time-sharing policies (e.g., RR) therefore
mitigate head-of-line blocking and preserve answering-phase
QoE, despite incurring preemption overhead.
In summary, two key insights emerge. (1) The reasoning and
answering phases exhibit fundamentally different sensitivities:
reasoning latency is highly interruption-sensitive, while answering QoE is threshold- (not absolute latency-) sensitive, and
(2) time-sharing is especially effective in the answering phase
because it avoids blocking without violating SLO thresholds.
Existing scheduling policies targeting conventional
(single-phase) LLM inference ignore the distinct latency vs.
threshold sensitivities of reasoning-based workloads. This
gap motivates phase-aware scheduling that adapts its strategy,
minimizing interruptions during reasoning while employing
fair time-sharing during answering to jointly optimize
reasoning latency and answering phase user experience.
IV. PASCAL : A P HASE -AWARE S CHEDULING A LGORITHM
FOR S ERVING R EASONING - BASED LLM S
PASCAL is a scheduling system that improves the user
experience for reasoning-based LLMs on multi-instance LLM
serving systems. An instance is the software abstraction in
LLM serving frameworks that serves as the unit of execution,
managing a replica of the model weights and coordinating
access to shared GPU resources. PASCAL schedules inference
requests differently in the reasoning and answering phases by
exploiting their asymmetric sensitivity to preemption. Specifically, it minimizes interruptions during the reasoning phase
to reduce TTFT and permits controlled preemption during the
answering phase without compromising SLO goals for TPOT.
A. High-level Overview
We take a top-down approach to explain PASCAL’s twolevel scheduling architecture (Figure 6). The instance-level
scheduler selects which GPU instance should service each incoming request. The intra-instance scheduler then orchestrates
request batching and kernel execution within the instance.
The instance-level scheduler employs two placement algorithms, one for each phase of a request: reasoning and
answering. When a request first arrives, it enters the reasoning
phase2 . During this phase, the request generates intermediate
reasoning tokens from the input prompt until reasoning completes. For requests in this phase, the scheduler selects the
2 For clarity, we collectively refer to the prefill stage and the subsequent
reasoning phase of decoding as the reasoning phase.

New requests

Instance-level
scheduler
Instance
selection for
reasoning
requests
(Algorithm 1)

Instance
selection for
answering
requests
(Algorithm 2)

KV cache
# of requests
SLO condition

: Reasoning request
: Answering request

Requests in phase transition

High-priority queue
Low-priority queue

Intra-instance
scheduler
Instance monitor

GPU

Instance pool

Instance

Fig. 6: Overview of PASCAL. The system comprises an instance-level
scheduler and a pool of serving instances. All incoming requests first
enter the reasoning phase and are routed to the appropriate instances
using Algorithm 1. After a request transitions to the answering phase,
the instance-level scheduler selects a (possibly different) instance
using Algorithm 2. Within each serving instance, an intra-instance
scheduler manages routed requests through high- and low-priority
queues and orchestrates their execution. An instance monitor continuously collects runtime metrics to guide these placement decisions.

instance that minimizes reasoning latency while preserving
the performance of other requests already executing on each
GPU instance. After the system’s instance monitor detects that
the most recent token generated by an existing request is the
special token signaling the end of the reasoning phase (e.g., the
<\think> token in DeepSeek-R1), the scheduler re-examines
whether migrating that request to a different instance would
be beneficial. Such migration aims to minimize any delay
after reasoning completes, satisfy answering-phase SLOs, and
reduce interference with co-located requests.
Based on the instance-level scheduler’s decisions, a single
GPU instance may host requests from both the reasoning
and answering phases. To manage these mixed phase requests
effectively, PASCAL deploys a local intra-instance scheduler
that coordinates execution across phases. It prioritizes the
scheduling of reasoning requests by placing them in a highpriority scheduling queue, since their latency directly affects
TTFT and is highly sensitive to blocking and preemption.
Answering requests are inserted to a low-priority queue, and
the scheduler time-shares the remaining GPU resources among
them and seeks to preserve a consistent user experience.
Requests within the same (high-/low-priority) queue are scheduled based on a round-robin policy.
B. Instance-level Scheduler
The instance-level scheduler selects the GPU instance for
each request based on its current phase and SLO requirements. Consequently, the scheduler uses two distinct instanceselection algorithms, one per phase, each conditioned on the
current status of an instance’s request queues. As noted earlier,
reasoning requests are routed to the high-priority queue within
a GPU instance, whereas answering requests are routed to
the low-priority queue. Accordingly, PASCAL employs two
algorithms: one for assigning new reasoning requests (Algorithm 1) and another for determining whether requests that
have entered the answering phase should be migrated to a
different instance (Algorithm 2). These algorithms consider
each instance’s queue occupancy and the characteristics of

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 Instance Selection for Reasoning Requests

Algorithm 2 Instance Selection for Answering Requests

1: Input: Set of instances I, where for each instance i ∈ I, we have:
ti : whether all answering requests meet their SLOs (TRUE/FALSE)
mi : total memory occupied by KV cache (GPU + CPU)
2: Output: Selected instance to schedule the reasoning phase request
3: E ← { i ∈ I | ti = TRUE }
4: if E = ∅ then
5:
E←I
6: end if
7: selected ← argmini∈E (mi )
8: return selected

1: Input: Set of instances I, where for each instance i ∈ I, we have:
ti : whether all answering requests meet their SLOs (TRUE/FALSE)
ri : number of reasoning requests in high-priority queue
ai : number of answering requests that has not exhausted the first time
quantum
2: Output: Selected instance to schedule the answering phase request
3: E ← { i ∈ I | ti = TRUE }
4: if E = ∅ then
5:
E←I
6:
for all i ∈ E do
7:
ri ← ri + ai
8:
end for
9: end if
10: selected ← argmini∈E (ri )
11: return selected
: Reasoning phase

: Answering phase

: Phase transition

Instance selection
CPU GPU

Instance selection
CPU GPU

individual requests, aiming to balance memory usage while
respecting the phases’ differing latency sensitivities.
Instance selection for reasoning requests. As described
in Algorithm 1, the instance-level scheduler first inspects each
GPU instance’s token pacer to determine whether answering
requests are being served at the expected user-perceived rate. If
the token pacer reports insufficient remaining tokens (indicating token generation is slower than the user’s expected pace),
the instance is deemed to be violating its answering-phase SLO
and is excluded from the candidate set (i.e., ti = FALSE in
line 3). Recall that answering requests are assigned a lower
priority than the reasoning requests and thus must rely on
whatever GPU memory remains once the high-priority queue
has allocated KV cache space for reasoning requests. Therefore, an instance already missing its answering-phase SLO
implies that available GPU memory is insufficient to support
the current answering requests. Consequently, scheduling additional high-priority reasoning requests to such instance would
only intensify memory pressure and further delay answering
requests. Among the remaining SLO-compliant candidate instances, the scheduler selects the instance with the smallest
KV cache footprint mi (line 7). A smaller KV cache footprint
generally indicates fewer active requests, making the instance
more amenable to accommodating additional new requests
without interfering with requests already under execution.
Moreover, smaller KV cache correlates with shorter attentionlayer execution time, increasing the likelihood of meeting
TTFT for new reasoning requests, further justifying this design
decision. When no instance meets the SLO condition (i.e.,
E = ∅ in Algorithm 1), the scheduler still chooses the instance
with the minimum mi to minimize additional performance
degradation for in-flight requests (lines 4–5).
Instance selection for answering requests. During the execution of a reasoning request, the instance monitor in Figure 6
continuously checks for the special token (e.g., <\think>)
that marks the transition to the answering phase. When this
token appears (signaling that the model is ready to emit answer
tokens), the instance-level scheduler migrates the request to
a new GPU instance according to Algorithm 2, unless our
adaptive migration policy (discussed further at the later part
of this subsection) overrides such migration decision. As with
Algorithm 1, any instance that is currently failing to meet
answering-phase SLOs (i.e., ti = FALSE) is removed from
the candidate set (line 3). From the remaining candidates, the
scheduler selects the instance with the fewest active reasoning-

Instance 0

Instance 1

(a)

Instance 2

Instance 0

Instance 1

Instance 2

(b)

Fig. 7: Adaptive migration example. (a) Algorithm 2 initially recommends migrating the phase transitioning request to Instance 2.
Because GPU memory in Instance 2 is fully utilized (indicated by
four yellow blocks) while Instance 0 still has free memory (two empty
slots), (b) the system overrides Algorithm 2’s migration decision and
continues executing the phase transitioning request in Instance 0.

phase requests (ri ) to minimize the chance that the answer
request is delayed by higher-priority reasoning requests (line
10). Because reasoning requests reside in the high-priority
queue and allocate GPU memory first, an instance hosting
many such requests often leaves too little GPU memory for
a new answering request. Insufficient GPU memory forces
answering requests either to spill their KV cache to CPU
memory or to wait until resources are freed—both of which
compromise answering-phase SLOs. This motivates selecting
the instance with the smallest ri for answering requests.
If no instance satisfies the SLO condition, the scheduler
selects the one with the smallest ri + ai (lines 4–9), where ai
denotes the number of answering requests in the low-priority
queue that have not yet exhausted the first time quantum
(i.e., they are more likely to be scheduled next under the RR
policy). As described in Section II, RR scheduling is fairnessoriented; the more “fresh” answering requests (ai ) an instance
holds, the more the newly arriving answering request must
compete for scheduling opportunities, an undesirable outcome
when selecting the instance for new answering requests. Our
empirical evaluation confirms that PASCAL’s such heuristic
based instance-selection algorithm, which considers both ri
and ai , achieves better load balancing and SLO attainment
than using ri alone under these scenarios.
Adaptive migration. Although requests are generally migrated to a new instance when they transition to the answering
phase, strictly following Algorithm 2’s decision can lead to
suboptimal resource utilization in certain scenarios. Therefore, PASCAL introduces an adaptive migration mechanism
that determines whether to migrate a request during phase
transitions based on the current memory availability. This

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

strategy becomes particularly important in scenarios where
reasoning and answering requests are distributed asymmetrically across instances. Figure 7(a) shows one such case when
reasoning requests are distributed across many instances, while
answering requests are concentrated on a certain instance.
Since answering requests are directed to instances with the
fewest active reasoning requests (Algorithm 2), they tend to
accumulate on the same instance (Instance 2). In this case,
when a reasoning request in Instance 0 transitions to the
answering phase, Algorithm 2 likely selects Instance 2
based on the number of reasoning requests, which lacks available GPU memory. Despite Instance 0 having sufficient
memory to handle the answering phase, migrating the request
to Instance 2 can cause the unnecessary execution stall
for answering requests in Instance 2. To handle this case,
at phase transition, if the current instance has sufficient GPU
memory while the one selected for answering phase does not,
PASCAL preserves the request on the current instance rather
than migrating it to the selected one (Figure 7(b)). This avoids
unnecessary CPU offloading and KV cache transfer overhead,
and it better utilizes available GPU memory.
KV cache transfer overhead. Migrating a request at phase
transition requires transferring its entire KV cache from the
source to the destination instance. Unlike prior work [39], [44],
[54], which can overlap KV cache transfers with computation,
reasoning-based LLMs cannot predict phase transitions in
advance, as transitions only become apparent when the model
emits specific tokens (e.g., <\think>) that indicate the end
of the reasoning phase. In reasoning-based LLMs, this transfer
latency can impact TTFT because the server must wait for both
the completion of the reasoning phase and the subsequent KV
cache migration before generating the first answering token.
Nonetheless, we find that the overhead of KV cache transfers is negligible in reasoning models, as TTFT is primarily
dominated by reasoning phase latency. For example, Patel et
al. [39] analyzed KV cache transfer latency in a disaggregated
LLM serving system and reported a one-time transfer delay of
approximately 40ms for 2,048 tokens. To put this in context,
consider a per-token latency of 30ms [39], which reflects
an aggressive decoding speed. Because reasoning phases can
involve hundreds or even thousands of tokens—equating to
several tens of seconds of reasoning latency—the one-time
KV cache transfer constitutes only a small fraction of the total
TTFT and is therefore negligible.
C. Intra-instance Scheduler
This subsection explains how the intra-instance scheduler
manages and executes requests within each GPU instance.
As shown in Figure 6, each instance maintains a hierarchical
priority queue that separates the reasoning and answering
phases based on their distinct performance requirements:
•

High-priority queue stores requests in the reasoning
phase. These requests are served first and receive preferential allocation privilege to GPU memory, minimizing
the impact of blocking or preemption on TTFT.

Fig. 8: Reasoning and answering token count distribution for (a)
AlpacaEval2.0 [10] and (b) Arena-Hard [29] datasets.

Low-priority queue: stores requests in the answering
phase. Because these requests tolerate preemption better,
they are executed using whatever GPU memory remains
after high-priority allocations are satisfied.
Occasionally, a single reasoning request with an exceptionally long sequence and a very large KV cache can exhaust
the memory needed by answering requests. In such cases,
the intra-instance scheduler demotes the reasoning request
whose KV-cache size exceeds a user-defined threshold to the
low-priority queue, effectively treating it as a low-priority
answering request. This conditional demotion policy frees
GPU memory for answering requests more quickly while
minimally impacting reasoning-phase SLOs.
For each priority queue, the scheduler applies a different dispatch strategy. For reasoning requests in the highpriority queue, PASCAL adopts a RR policy. As discussed
in Figure 4, when the serving system is constrained by
GPU memory, offloading even high-priority reasoning requests
becomes inevitable, and both FCFS and RR experience latency
degradation. However, the severity of this degradation differs:
FCFS increases average latency due to head-of-line blocking
across all request lengths, whereas RR provides much faster
responsiveness for short reasoning requests at the cost of
higher tail latency (Figure 4). To this end, PASCAL selects
RR for the high-priority queue to guarantee lower TTFT for
short reasoning requests under memory pressure.
Unlike reasoning requests, tokens generated during answering requests are streamed directly to users, making
perceived responsiveness critical. As evaluated in Figure 5,
RR exhibits high robustness to preemption-induced latency
overheads and achieves high SLO attainment rates. To mitigate user-experience degradation under preemption or delayed
execution, PASCAL augments RR with a token pacer for
answering requests in the low-priority queue. The token pacer
regulates the token emission rate to match user expectations,
allowing even preempted answering requests to appear responsive. This mechanism enables PASCAL to maintain a high
answering-phase SLO success rate under constrained memory,
outperforming an FCFS baseline.
•

V. E VALUATION
A. Methodology
Simulation framework. We developed a cluster-level simulator to evaluate design points enabled by PASCAL. Inspired
by the methodology in [39], our simulator models eight server
nodes (instances) connected via a 100 Gbps fabric, each
with an NVIDIA H100 96 GB GPU. For single serving
instance simulation, we adopt a profile-based LLM serving

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

methodology, which prior work has shown to strike a balance
between simulation speed and accuracy [1], [6], [30], [39]. The
single-instance simulator uses vLLM profiling data and mirrors established techniques [1], [6], [30], [39] to capture GPU
execution behavior. We validate it by comparing simulated and
measured inference latency on a real system with an Intel Xeon
Platinum 8558 CPU and H100 GPU (PCIe 5.0, vLLM 0.6.1,
PyTorch 2.4.0, CUDA 12.1). Our simulator achieves a mean
absolute percentage error (MAPE) of 1.62% for end-to-end
latency and captures key metrics with MAPE values of 12.6%
for mean TTFT and 6.49% for TPOT.
Model and dataset. We evaluate PASCAL using DeepSeekR1-Distill-Qwen-32B [9], [16], an open-source reasoning
LLM. The 32B model was chosen to reflect LLM serving
scenarios in which GPU memory constraints limit the allocation of KV caches across diverse requests, forcing the
scheduler to block or preempt requests as necessary. Serving
traces are built from AlpacaEval2.0 [10] and Arena-Hard [29]
prompts, queried via OpenAI’s o4-mini [38] API, which
provides reasoning/answering token counts (Figure 8). These
two benchmarks, also used in DeepSeek-R1’s evaluation [16],
capture chat applications requiring detailed responses. We
additionally analyze scenarios with long reasoning but short
answers (e.g., problem-solving) in Section V-D.
Scheduling policy. We compare PASCAL against two baseline scheduling algorithms as follows:
FCFS: The default policy in vLLM. Requests are served
strictly in arrival order without distinguishing reasoning
and answering phases. When KV cache usage exceeds
GPU memory, the KV cache spill to CPU memory, and
new admissions pause until space frees up.
• Round-robin (RR): A preemptive scheduler that allocates fixed token quanta to active requests in circular
order, regardless of which phase the request is executing;
requests that finish their quantum are deprioritized.
•

For both baselines, reasoning requests are placed on the
instance with the smallest KV footprint, and no migration
occurs at phase transitions. Token quantum is set to 500 for RR
and for each queue in PASCAL. In PASCAL, reasoning requests
exceeding 5000 tokens are demoted to the low-priority queue.
Metric. We evaluate schedulers using two metrics: TTFT
and SLO violation. TTFT measures latency from request
submission to the first answering token. SLO violations are
assessed via QoE, calculated from TPOT starting at the first
answering token. Because reasoning-based LLMs have highly
variable reasoning lengths, the original QoE metric (which
includes a fixed TTFT target) is impractical; we instead compute QoE solely from TPOT and evaluate TTFT separately.
An SLO violation is counted when QoE falls below 0.95.
B. User Experience (TTFT, SLO Violation) and Throughput
TTFT. Figure 9 shows the raw TTFT values of all
requests as a function of reasoning token length and Figure 10
summarizes the resulting tail TTFT. Below we focus on tail
TTFT because most requests fit within GPU memory and

Fig. 9: Absolute TTFT for all scheduled requests as a function
of reasoning-token length. Experiments were conducted under three
request-arrival rates (low, medium, and high). The “high” rate stresses
the LLM serving system more severely; exceeding GPU compute
and memory capacity increases the likelihood of preemption and
blocking. Request arrivals follow a Poisson distribution.

Fig. 10: Tail TTFT latency as a function of reasoning token length
under high request-arrival rates. Requests are grouped into 256-token
bins based on reasoning token length (e.g., [0–255] bin, [256–511]
bin, . . .). These workloads exhibit a highly skewed distribution where
more than 70% of requests generate fewer than 1,000 reasoning
tokens. This skew causes substantial variation in the number of
requests that fall under a given bin. Consequently, we use different tail
latency metrics based on the sample size of each bin: maximum TTFT
is used for bins with fewer than 10 samples, 90th-percentile (P90)
for bins with fewer than 20 samples, P95 for bins with fewer than
100 samples, and P99 otherwise. Bins with fewer than five samples
are omitted as we believe they are statistically less meaningful.

scheduling effects are most pronounced in the tail, where
memory pressure triggers cache spills and preemption.
The baseline FCFS suffers from head-of-line blocking because once a request starts reasoning, it holds GPU memory until its answering phase completes. As a result, even
short-reasoning requests experience severe tail TTFT degradation. RR can mitigate head-of-line blocking, which improves
TTFT for shorter requests. In RR, answering phases always
follow reasoning phases within each request’s lifecycle, but
they receive progressively lower priority as the request consumes more time quanta. This behavior implicitly creates
a per-request hierarchy (i.e., scheduling priority) that favors
reasoning, similar to PASCAL. However, RR cannot enforce
a global “reasoning-first” scheduling priority as it does not
distinguish the reasoning phase vs. answering phase. For
example, a short request that quickly enters its answering
phase can retain higher priority than a long reasoning request that has already consumed many quanta, rendering
RR’s fairness-oriented policy to deprioritize the longer re-

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 11: SLO violation rates across different request-arrival rates.

Fig. 12: Serving throughput across different request-arrival rates.

quest. PASCAL maintains a consistent phase-aware scheduling
policy across all requests: reasoning phases always preempt
answering phases, and requests migrate to the instance with
the least reasoning requests at phase transitions. This avoids
head-of-line blocking and keeps tail TTFT low across all
datasets and traffic loads. Compared to FCFS, PASCAL cuts
tail TTFT by up to 61% on AlpacaEval2.0 and 72% on
Arena-Hard, with absolute tail TTFT reductions of 43.22 sec
and 64.21 sec, respectively. Compared to RR, PASCAL reduces
tail TTFT by up to 89.91 sec and 72.73 sec, a 33% and 29%
reduction thereby significantly improving user experience.
It is worth noting that there exists a small number of
cases where PASCAL causes minor TTFT degradation, but the
absolute increases are small. For example, in AlpacaEval2.0
the worst case is a 13.30 sec increase vs. FCFS (6.12% higher
TTFT) and an 8.25 sec increase vs. RR (9.23% higher TTFT).
This slight degradation is due to increased preemption among
answering requests competing for limited GPU memory. Outside these rare outliers, PASCAL consistently maintains lowest
TTFT compared to all baseline schedulers.
SLO violations. As shown in Figure 11, PASCAL consistently achieves lower or comparable answering-phase SLO violation than both baselines across all request-arrival rates. This
advantage stems from PASCAL’s SLO-aware instance-level
scheduling, which routes answering requests to instances with
minimal reasoning load, while also prioritizing reasoning
phase through its hierarchical queue. At request-arrival rates
higher than those in Figure 11, all schedulers inevitably see
higher SLO violations, as no serving system can sustain
performance once demand exceeds its resource capacity. However, PASCAL confines most degradation to SLO violations
while keeping TTFT low, whereas the baseline schedulers
degrade in both TTFT and SLO metrics. This resilience arises
from PASCAL’s strict reasoning-phase prioritization via its
hierarchical scheduler.
Serving throughput. Figure 12 shows the overall throughput of the LLM serving system across various request-arrival
rates and datasets. Throughput is measured as the total time

Fig. 13: Evaluation of (a) TTFT, (b) reasoning latency, (c) P99
blocking latency, and (d) SLO violation rate on the AlpacaEval2.0
dataset when PASCAL’s inter-instance request migration feature is
disabled (PASCAL(NoMigration)).

required to generate all output tokens, including both reasoning
and answering tokens. As shown, PASCAL achieves throughput comparable to both baseline schedulers, differing by no
more than 3%. This result demonstrates that software-level
scheduling decisions that account for the distinct reasoning
and answering phases of reasoning-based LLMs can significantly improve user experience (in terms of TTFT and TPOT)
without compromising overall throughput.
C. KV Cache Transfer Overhead
In our multi-instance server environment, multiple instances
may simultaneously migrate requests transitioning into the
answering phase (along with their associated KV caches)
to the same target instance, causing bandwidth contention
and potentially increasing TTFT and overall latency. In our
evaluation, we observed P99 KV cache transfer latencies of
0.14 sec for AlpacaEval2.0 and 0.25 sec for Arena-Hard
under high request-arrival rates. Since TTFT in these scenarios
ranges from a few seconds to several hundred seconds, the
impact of KV cache transfer overhead on end-to-end latency
is negligible. These results demonstrate that, although KV
cache migration introduces some overhead, the performance
gains from intelligently migrating phase-transitioning requests
across instances far outweigh its costs.
D. Discussions
Importance of migrating requests. To demonstrate the importance of migrating a request at the reasoning-to-answering
boundary, we construct a variant of PASCAL that disables
migration. This version (aka PASCAL(NoMigration)) retains
the hierarchical queue design but pins every request to the
GPU instance chosen by Algorithm 1; once the reasoning

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 14: Reasoning and answering token count distributions for
(a) MATH-500 [17], (b) GPQA [41], and (c) LiveCodeBench [20].
Distributions are derived by querying each benchmark’s prompts into
the o4-mini model, following the methodology in Section V-A.

Fig. 15: Comparison of PASCAL(NonAdaptive) and PASCAL on the
AlpacaEval2.0 dataset. (a) shows the TTFT distributions, (b) presents
the SLO violation rates under varying request-arrival rates, and (c)
compares the end-to-end latency (covering the entire execution from
the reasoning phase to the answering phase) across multiple latency
metrics under high request-arrival rates.

phase ends, no inter-instance migration occurs. Under PAS CAL (NoMigration), the scheduler still prioritizes reasoning
requests, but requests can still stall at the phase transition
point. If GPU memory is fully utilized by high-priority
reasoning requests, an answering request that is routed to
the same instance’s low-priority queue cannot get scheduled
until the GPU memory is freed. Because PASCAL’s original
placement policy only considers the KV cache footprint during
reasoning, it neglects the memory required for answering,
thereby elevating the risk of SLO violations.
Figure 13 illustrates these effects. PASCAL(NoMigration)
worsens tail TTFT under high request-arrival rates across a
broad range of reasoning-token lengths (Figure 13(a)), even
though reasoning phase latency remains almost unchanged
(Figure 13(b)). To understand the cause, Figure 13(c) reports
the latency between the moment a request transitions from
reasoning to answering and the moment it is first scheduled.
The P99 of this latency (referred to as blocking latency)
reaches up to 27.39 sec in PASCAL(NoMigration), whereas
PASCAL keeps it near zero. Overall, PASCAL(NoMigration)
suffers from markedly higher answering phase SLO violation
rates than PASCAL (Figure 13(d)), highlighting the value of
PASCAL’s SLO-aware request migration at phase boundaries.
Effectiveness of adaptive migration. To evaluate the effectiveness of PASCAL’s adaptive migration policy, we compare our PASCAL against PASCAL(NonAdaptive), which turns

Fig. 16: (a) TTFT distribution and (b) tail TTFT by reasoning
token length, with 50% of the Arena-Hard trace replaced by the
reasoning-heavy datasets shown in Figure 14.

off adaptive migration and always triggers request migration at phase transitions, regardless of memory availability.
Figure 15(a) and (b) show the TTFT distributions and SLO
violation rates of PASCAL(NonAdaptive) versus PASCAL.
Although the TTFT distributions appear similar, the SLO
violation rate under PASCAL(NonAdaptive) rises sharply with
increasing request arrival rates, reaching 7.45% compared to
only 0.69% under PASCAL. This degradation occurs because
PASCAL(NonAdaptive) ignores each instance’s current memory state, migrating requests even when the target instance
lacks sufficient GPU memory, while the current instance could
have immediately served the answering phase without stalling
(see Figure 7(a)). Although the instance-level scheduler excludes instances currently violating their SLOs, its decisions
rely solely on the current token pacer state and cannot foresee
future memory contention due to unpredictable output lengths.
Consequently, such unnecessary migrations increase the risk
of future SLO violations for answering requests on the target instance, a problem effectively mitigated by PASCAL’s
adaptive migration policy. Overall, compared to PASCAL,
PASCAL(NonAdaptive) worsens median end-to-end latency by
20.1% and tail latency by 9.7% (Figure 15(c)).
Alternative reasoning datasets. Our evaluation so far
has focused on chat applications where users expect detailed responses with long answering tokens. In contrast,
problem-solving benchmarks [3], [17], [20], [21], [25], [41]
feature lengthy reasoning phases and comparatively short answers. As shown in Figure 14(a)-(c), the number of reasoning
tokens can reach as much as 8.48× higher than answering
tokens in these datasets. In such reasoning-heavy datasets,
PASCAL’s benefits may diminish because answering phases are
too short to cause significant scheduling contention, reducing
the impact of phase-aware scheduling.
To this end, we also evaluate a scenario where 50%
of Arena-Hard requests are replaced with reasoning-heavy
requests sampled uniformly from MATH-500, GPQA, and
LiveCodeBench. As shown in Figure 16, PASCAL reduces tail
TTFT by up to 70% over FCFS for shorter reasoning segments
by mitigating head-of-line blocking, where long reasoning
monopolizes GPU memory until answering completes. Even
for long-reasoning requests, TTFT rises only 6.8% compared
to FCFS, a modest trade-off given the broader gains. Compared to RR, improvements are smaller due to dataset characteristics: short answering phases create minimal interference
with reasoning even under baseline scheduling. RR’s implicit
per-request hierarchy (favoring reasoning over answering, as

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

described in Section V-B) further reduces contention. Thus,
PASCAL’s explicit phase isolation provides limited additional
benefit in this setting. Nonetheless, PASCAL still reduces tail
TTFT for certain token ranges by up to 13.9%, with worst-case
degradation under 7.7%. SLO violation rates remain similar
to RR and consistently lower than FCFS. Overall, PASCAL
provides stable, competitive performance even when reasoning–answering contention is minimal.
VI. R ELATED WORKS
LLM serving optimization. Prior work [2], [23], [26], [27],
[43], [44], [51] has optimized LLM serving for performance
and SLO compliance. ORCA [51] introduces iteration-level
scheduling with continuous batching to reduce queuing latency
and improve throughput. vLLM [27] combines PagedAttention
with continuous batching for high-throughput inference under
fine-grained GPU memory management. Andes [31] proposes
a QoE-aware preemptive scheduler for streaming services to
preserve user-perceived responsiveness. Llumnix [44] supports
priority-aware migration by assigning virtual memory usage to
requests, guiding dynamic rescheduling to balance load and
prioritize high-SLO requests. None of these systems address
the unique characteristics of the reasoning phase in reasoning
LLMs, leaving TTFT optimization largely unexplored.
Reasoning-based LLM inference. Recent work has tackled inefficiencies in long-chain reasoning. ThinkPrune [19]
reduces redundant reasoning steps via reinforcement learning
to shorten token sequences without sacrificing performance.
Dynasor [13] complements this by predicting requests that
are likely to require extended reasoning and allocating additional compute resources accordingly. For requests predicted to have reached a stable or confident reasoning state,
Dynasor terminates decoding early to save computation. In
contrast, PASCAL is a scheduling framework that exploits the
asymmetric resource demands of reasoning versus answering
phases, enabling priority-aware execution and dynamic migration across serving instances without modifying models
or adding inference-time heuristics. Rather than manipulating
the reasoning phase itself, PASCAL introduces a novel phaseaware scheduling mechanism that distinguishes between the
two phases while keeping the execution pipeline intact, making
it orthogonal to reasoning-token reduction methods [13], [19].
Disaggregated LLM inference. Several prior works [11],
[39], [54] leverage the distinct compute characteristics of the
prefill and decode stages by disaggregating these stages across
dedicated hardware, improving energy efficiency and reducing
request contention. DistServe [54], for example, partitions
the inference pipeline based on the observation that prefill
and decoding interfere with each other due to their differing
resource demands, assigning each stage to hardware configurations that better satisfy their stage-specific SLO constraints.
In contrast to these disaggregated LLM serving systems,
which focus on conventional LLMs, our work targets emerging reasoning-based LLMs, where the decoding stage itself
consists of two semantically distinct phases: reasoning and
answering. The key contribution of PASCAL is identifying this

phase-based execution behavior and intelligently scheduling
decoding requests to minimize interference. This insight is
orthogonal to existing disaggregated inference systems and can
be layered on top of them for additional performance gains.
VII. F UTURE WORK
PASCAL in heterogeneous system architectures. PASCAL
focuses on GPU-centric LLM serving, consistent with many
representative prior works [2], [27], [39], [54] where all computations are executed exclusively on GPUs and the CPU is
used primarily as a backing storage for offloaded tensors, without participating in the LLM computation process. Meanwhile,
several recent studies have explored a heterogeneous computing model for LLM inference, in which the CPU collaborates
with the GPU to accelerate LLMs [24], [33]. More recently,
the introduction of Rubin CPX [35]—a prefill-optimized GPU
designed to complement the standard (now relatively decodeoptimized) Rubin GPU [36] by handling the compute-bound
prefill stage—has gained attention as it presents opportunity to
balance compute and memory utilization across heterogeneous
GPUs (i.e., prefill-optimized vs. decode-optimized).
Applying PASCAL’s phase-aware scheduling algorithm on
top of these emerging heterogeneous compute devices introduces unique design challenges. For instance, offloading KV
caches, activations, or weights must be handled more carefully,
as these data may still be needed for ongoing computations
depending on how compute and memory operations are partitioned across devices, as well as how scheduling policies and
inter-device coherence are orchestrated. A deeper exploration
of PASCAL in such heterogeneous environments is beyond the
scope of this work and is left for future investigation.
Explicit resource partitioning across reasoning and
answering phases. In prior works such as DistServe [54]
and Splitwise [39], the prefill (compute-bound) and decoding (memory-bound) stages exhibit fundamentally distinct
computational characteristics, which makes explicit resource
partitioning beneficial. Specifically, DistServe emphasizes the
interference between the prefill and decoding stages that stems
from their per-step latency difference, where the slower prefill
stage delays decoding progress within the same iteration,
while Splitwise leverages hardware heterogeneity to better suit
each stage’s computational characteristics. In contrast, under
PASCAL, both the reasoning and answering phases belong to
the same decoding stage. Thus, applying a DistServe-style
explicit partitioning offers little benefit, as the two phases have
similar per-step latencies and do not experience the iterationlevel interference that motivates stage separation. Similarly,
applying a Splitwise-style explicit resource partitioning is less
effective, since both phases share comparable computational
characteristics and are equally well-suited to the same hardware resources, yielding no efficiency gain from assigning
them to different devices. Consequently, the potential benefits
of explicitly partitioning resources across the reasoning and
answering phases is questionable, while its drawbacks become
more pronounced. A deeper exploration of this design space
is left for future work.

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VIII. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce a phase-aware scheduling algorithm for reasoning-based LLM serving systems. Based
on our key observation that reasoning latency dominates
Time-To-First-Token (TTFT), PASCAL’s scheduler applies
lightweight phase detection and priority assignment during decoding, enabling our proposed system to honor the
asymmetric performance sensitivities of reasoning versus answering tokens. A hierarchical intra-instance queue, combined with SLO-aware inter-instance migration, minimizes
tail TTFT while preserving answer-phase token throughput.
Consequently, PASCAL delivers consistently low tail latency
without sacrificing overall throughput or answer quality.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by Institute of Information
& Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation(IITP)
grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No.RS-202400438851, (SW Starlab) High-performance Privacy-preserving
Machine Learning System and System Software), (No.RS2025-02264029, Implementation and Validation of an AI
Semiconductor-Based Data Center Composable Cluster Infrastructure, 30%), (No.RS-2025-02214652, Development of
SoC Technology for AI Semiconductor-Converged Pooled
Storage/Memory), (No. RS-2024-00457882, AI Research Hub
Project), Samsung Research Funding Center of Samsung
Electronics (SRFC-IT2402-03), and IITP under the Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence Semiconductor(IITP2026-RS-2023-00256472) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT). We also thank Yunjae Lee for his constructive
feedback that helped improve this paper. Minsoo Rhu is the
corresponding author.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. Agrawal, N. Kedia, J. Mohan, A. Panwar, N. Kwatra, B. Gulavani,
R. Ramjee, and A. Tumanov, “Vidur: A Large-Scale Simulation Framework For LLM Inference,” in The Eighth Annual Conference on Machine
Learning and Systems (MLSys), 2024.
[2] A. Agrawal, N. Kedia, A. Panwar, J. Mohan, N. Kwatra, B. Gulavani,
A. Tumanov, and R. Ramjee, “Taming Throughput-latency Tradeoff
in LLM Inference with Sarathi-Serve,” in Proceedings of the USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI),
2024.
[3] V. AI, https://www.vals.ai/benchmarks/aime, 2025.
[4] K. Alizadeh, S. I. Mirzadeh, D. Belenko, S. Khatamifard, M. Cho, C. C.
Del Mundo, M. Rastegari, and M. Farajtabar, “LLM in a flash: Efficient
Large Language Model Inference with Limited Memory,” in Proceedings
of the ACL (Association for Computational Linguistics), 2024.
[5] R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut, J. Schalkwyk,
A. M. Dai, A. Hauth, K. Millican, D. Silver, M. Johnson, I. Antonoglou,
J. Schrittwieser, A. Glaese, J. Chen, E. Pitler, T. Lillicrap, A. Lazaridou,
O. Firat, J. Molloy, M. Isard, P. R. Barham, T. Hennigan, B. Lee,
F. Viola, M. Reynolds, Y. Xu, R. Doherty, E. Collins, C. Meyer,
E. Rutherford, E. Moreira, K. Ayoub, M. Goel, J. Krawczyk, C. Du,
E. Chi, H.-T. Cheng, E. Ni, P. Shah, P. Kane, B. Chan, M. Faruqui,
A. Severyn, H. Lin, Y. Li, Y. Cheng, A. Ittycheriah, M. Mahdieh,
M. Chen, P. Sun, D. Tran, S. Bagri, B. Lakshminarayanan, J. Liu,
A. Orban, F. Güra, H. Zhou, X. Song, A. Boffy, H. Ganapathy, S. Zheng,
H. Choe, Ágoston Weisz, T. Zhu, Y. Lu, S. Gopal, J. Kahn, M. Kula,
J. Pitman, R. Shah, E. Taropa, M. A. Merey, M. Baeuml, Z. Chen, L. E.
Shafey, Y. Zhang, O. Sercinoglu, G. Tucker, E. Piqueras, M. Krikun,
I. Barr, N. Savinov, I. Danihelka, B. Roelofs, A. White, A. Andreassen,
T. von Glehn, L. Yagati, M. Kazemi, L. Gonzalez, M. Khalman,

J. Sygnowski, A. Frechette, C. Smith, L. Culp, L. Proleev, Y. Luan,
X. Chen, J. Lottes, N. Schucher, F. Lebron, A. Rrustemi, N. Clay,
P. Crone, T. Kocisky, J. Zhao, B. Perz, D. Yu, H. Howard, A. Bloniarz,
J. W. Rae, H. Lu, L. Sifre, M. Maggioni, F. Alcober, D. Garrette,
M. Barnes, S. Thakoor, J. Austin, G. Barth-Maron, W. Wong, R. Joshi,
R. Chaabouni, D. Fatiha, A. Ahuja, G. S. Tomar, E. Senter, M. Chadwick, I. Kornakov, N. Attaluri, I. Iturrate, R. Liu, Y. Li, S. Cogan,
J. Chen, C. Jia, C. Gu, Q. Zhang, J. Grimstad, A. J. Hartman, X. Garcia,
T. S. Pillai, J. Devlin, M. Laskin, D. de Las Casas, D. Valter, C. Tao,
L. Blanco, A. P. Badia, D. Reitter, M. Chen, J. Brennan, C. Rivera,
S. Brin, S. Iqbal, G. Surita, J. Labanowski, A. Rao, S. Winkler,
E. Parisotto, Y. Gu, K. Olszewska, R. Addanki, A. Miech, A. Louis,
D. Teplyashin, G. Brown, E. Catt, J. Balaguer, J. Xiang, P. Wang,
Z. Ashwood, A. Briukhov, A. Webson, S. Ganapathy, S. Sanghavi,
A. Kannan, M.-W. Chang, A. Stjerngren, J. Djolonga, Y. Sun, A. Bapna,
M. Aitchison, P. Pejman, H. Michalewski, T. Yu, C. Wang, J. Love,
J. Ahn, D. Bloxwich, K. Han, P. Humphreys, T. Sellam, J. Bradbury, V. Godbole, S. Samangooei, B. Damoc, A. Kaskasoli, S. M. R.
Arnold, V. Vasudevan, S. Agrawal, J. Riesa, D. Lepikhin, R. Tanburn,
S. Srinivasan, H. Lim, S. Hodkinson, P. Shyam, J. Ferret, S. Hand,
A. Garg, T. L. Paine, J. Li, Y. Li, M. Giang, A. Neitz, Z. Abbas,
S. York, M. Reid, E. Cole, A. Chowdhery, D. Das, D. Rogozińska,
V. Nikolaev, P. Sprechmann, Z. Nado, L. Zilka, F. Prost, L. He,
M. Monteiro, G. Mishra, C. Welty, J. Newlan, D. Jia, M. Allamanis,
C. H. Hu, R. de Liedekerke, J. Gilmer, C. Saroufim, S. Rijhwani, S. Hou,
D. Shrivastava, A. Baddepudi, A. Goldin, A. Ozturel, A. Cassirer,
Y. Xu, D. Sohn, D. Sachan, R. K. Amplayo, C. Swanson, D. Petrova,
S. Narayan, A. Guez, S. Brahma, J. Landon, M. Patel, R. Zhao,
K. Villela, L. Wang, W. Jia, M. Rahtz, M. Giménez, L. Yeung, J. Keeling,
P. Georgiev, D. Mincu, B. Wu, S. Haykal, R. Saputro, K. Vodrahalli,
J. Qin, Z. Cankara, A. Sharma, N. Fernando, W. Hawkins, B. Neyshabur,
S. Kim, A. Hutter, P. Agrawal, A. Castro-Ros, G. van den Driessche,
T. Wang, F. Yang, S. yiin Chang, P. Komarek, R. McIlroy, M. Lučić,
G. Zhang, W. Farhan, M. Sharman, P. Natsev, P. Michel, Y. Bansal,
S. Qiao, K. Cao, S. Shakeri, C. Butterfield, J. Chung, P. K. Rubenstein,
S. Agrawal, A. Mensch, K. Soparkar, K. Lenc, T. Chung, A. Pope,
L. Maggiore, J. Kay, P. Jhakra, S. Wang, J. Maynez, M. Phuong,
T. Tobin, A. Tacchetti, M. Trebacz, K. Robinson, Y. Katariya, S. Riedel,
P. Bailey, K. Xiao, N. Ghelani, L. Aroyo, A. Slone, N. Houlsby,
X. Xiong, Z. Yang, E. Gribovskaya, J. Adler, M. Wirth, L. Lee, M. Li,
T. Kagohara, J. Pavagadhi, S. Bridgers, A. Bortsova, S. Ghemawat,
Z. Ahmed, T. Liu, R. Powell, V. Bolina, M. Iinuma, P. Zablotskaia,
J. Besley, D.-W. Chung, T. Dozat, R. Comanescu, X. Si, J. Greer, G. Su,
M. Polacek, R. L. Kaufman, S. Tokumine, H. Hu, E. Buchatskaya,
Y. Miao, M. Elhawaty, A. Siddhant, N. Tomasev, J. Xing, C. Greer,
H. Miller, S. Ashraf, A. Roy, Z. Zhang, A. Ma, A. Filos, M. Besta,
R. Blevins, T. Klimenko, C.-K. Yeh, S. Changpinyo, J. Mu, O. Chang,
M. Pajarskas, C. Muir, V. Cohen, C. L. Lan, K. Haridasan, A. Marathe,
S. Hansen, S. Douglas, R. Samuel, M. Wang, S. Austin, C. Lan, J. Jiang,
J. Chiu, J. A. Lorenzo, L. L. Sjösund, S. Cevey, Z. Gleicher, T. Avrahami,
A. Boral, H. Srinivasan, V. Selo, R. May, K. Aisopos, L. Hussenot, L. B.
Soares, K. Baumli, M. B. Chang, A. Recasens, B. Caine, A. Pritzel,
F. Pavetic, F. Pardo, A. Gergely, J. Frye, V. Ramasesh, D. Horgan,
K. Badola, N. Kassner, S. Roy, E. Dyer, V. C. Campos, A. Tomala,
Y. Tang, D. E. Badawy, E. White, B. Mustafa, O. Lang, A. Jindal,
S. Vikram, Z. Gong, S. Caelles, R. Hemsley, G. Thornton, F. Feng,
W. Stokowiec, C. Zheng, P. Thacker, Çağlar Ünlü, Z. Zhang, M. Saleh,
J. Svensson, M. Bileschi, P. Patil, A. Anand, R. Ring, K. Tsihlas,
A. Vezer, M. Selvi, T. Shevlane, M. Rodriguez, T. Kwiatkowski,
S. Daruki, K. Rong, A. Dafoe, N. FitzGerald, K. Gu-Lemberg, M. Khan,
L. A. Hendricks, M. Pellat, V. Feinberg, J. Cobon-Kerr, T. Sainath,
M. Rauh, S. H. Hashemi, R. Ives, Y. Hasson, E. Noland, Y. Cao, N. Byrd,
L. Hou, Q. Wang, T. Sottiaux, M. Paganini, J.-B. Lespiau, A. Moufarek,
S. Hassan, K. Shivakumar, J. van Amersfoort, A. Mandhane, P. Joshi,
A. Goyal, M. Tung, A. Brock, H. Sheahan, V. Misra, C. Li, N. Rakićević,
M. Dehghani, F. Liu, S. Mittal, J. Oh, S. Noury, E. Sezener, F. Huot,
M. Lamm, N. D. Cao, C. Chen, S. Mudgal, R. Stella, K. Brooks,
G. Vasudevan, C. Liu, M. Chain, N. Melinkeri, A. Cohen, V. Wang,
K. Seymore, S. Zubkov, R. Goel, S. Yue, S. Krishnakumaran, B. Albert,
N. Hurley, M. Sano, A. Mohananey, J. Joughin, E. Filonov, T. Kepa,
Y. Eldawy, J. Lim, R. Rishi, S. Badiezadegan, T. Bos, J. Chang,
S. Jain, S. G. S. Padmanabhan, S. Puttagunta, K. Krishna, L. Baker,
N. Kalb, V. Bedapudi, A. Kurzrok, S. Lei, A. Yu, O. Litvin, X. Zhou,
Z. Wu, S. Sobell, A. Siciliano, A. Papir, R. Neale, J. Bragagnolo,

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

T. Toor, T. Chen, V. Anklin, F. Wang, R. Feng, M. Gholami, K. Ling,
L. Liu, J. Walter, H. Moghaddam, A. Kishore, J. Adamek, T. Mercado,
J. Mallinson, S. Wandekar, S. Cagle, E. Ofek, G. Garrido, C. Lombriser,
M. Mukha, B. Sun, H. R. Mohammad, J. Matak, Y. Qian, V. Peswani,
P. Janus, Q. Yuan, L. Schelin, O. David, A. Garg, Y. He, O. Duzhyi,
A. Älgmyr, T. Lottaz, Q. Li, V. Yadav, L. Xu, A. Chinien, R. Shivanna, A. Chuklin, J. Li, C. Spadine, T. Wolfe, K. Mohamed, S. Das,
Z. Dai, K. He, D. von Dincklage, S. Upadhyay, A. Maurya, L. Chi,
S. Krause, K. Salama, P. G. Rabinovitch, P. K. R. M, A. Selvan,
M. Dektiarev, G. Ghiasi, E. Guven, H. Gupta, B. Liu, D. Sharma,
I. H. Shtacher, S. Paul, O. Akerlund, F.-X. Aubet, T. Huang, C. Zhu,
E. Zhu, E. Teixeira, M. Fritze, F. Bertolini, L.-E. Marinescu, M. Bölle,
D. Paulus, K. Gupta, T. Latkar, M. Chang, J. Sanders, R. Wilson,
X. Wu, Y.-X. Tan, L. N. Thiet, T. Doshi, S. Lall, S. Mishra, W. Chen,
T. Luong, S. Benjamin, J. Lee, E. Andrejczuk, D. Rabiej, V. Ranjan,
K. Styrc, P. Yin, J. Simon, M. R. Harriott, M. Bansal, A. Robsky,
G. Bacon, D. Greene, D. Mirylenka, C. Zhou, O. Sarvana, A. Goyal,
S. Andermatt, P. Siegler, B. Horn, A. Israel, F. Pongetti, C.-W. L. Chen,
M. Selvatici, P. Silva, K. Wang, J. Tolins, K. Guu, R. Yogev, X. Cai,
A. Agostini, M. Shah, H. Nguyen, N. Donnaile, S. Pereira, L. Friso,
A. Stambler, A. Kurzrok, C. Kuang, Y. Romanikhin, M. Geller, Z. Yan,
K. Jang, C.-C. Lee, W. Fica, E. Malmi, Q. Tan, D. Banica, D. Balle,
R. Pham, Y. Huang, D. Avram, H. Shi, J. Singh, C. Hidey, N. Ahuja,
P. Saxena, D. Dooley, S. P. Potharaju, E. O’Neill, A. Gokulchandran,
R. Foley, K. Zhao, M. Dusenberry, Y. Liu, P. Mehta, R. Kotikalapudi,
C. Safranek-Shrader, A. Goodman, J. Kessinger, E. Globen, P. Kolhar,
C. Gorgolewski, A. Ibrahim, Y. Song, A. Eichenbaum, T. Brovelli,
S. Potluri, P. Lahoti, C. Baetu, A. Ghorbani, C. Chen, A. Crawford,
S. Pal, M. Sridhar, P. Gurita, A. Mujika, I. Petrovski, P.-L. Cedoz,
C. Li, S. Chen, N. D. Santo, S. Goyal, J. Punjabi, K. Kappaganthu,
C. Kwak, P. LV, S. Velury, H. Choudhury, J. Hall, P. Shah, R. Figueira,
M. Thomas, M. Lu, T. Zhou, C. Kumar, T. Jurdi, S. Chikkerur, Y. Ma,
A. Yu, S. Kwak, V. Ähdel, S. Rajayogam, T. Choma, F. Liu, A. Barua,
C. Ji, J. H. Park, V. Hellendoorn, A. Bailey, T. Bilal, H. Zhou, M. Khatir,
C. Sutton, W. Rzadkowski, F. Macintosh, R. Vij, K. Shagin, P. Medina,
C. Liang, J. Zhou, P. Shah, Y. Bi, A. Dankovics, S. Banga, S. Lehmann,
M. Bredesen, Z. Lin, J. E. Hoffmann, J. Lai, R. Chung, K. Yang, N. Balani, A. Bražinskas, A. Sozanschi, M. Hayes, H. F. Alcalde, P. Makarov,
W. Chen, A. Stella, L. Snijders, M. Mandl, A. Kärrman, P. Nowak,
X. Wu, A. Dyck, K. Vaidyanathan, R. R, J. Mallet, M. Rudominer,
E. Johnston, S. Mittal, A. Udathu, J. Christensen, V. Verma, Z. Irving,
A. Santucci, G. Elsayed, E. Davoodi, M. Georgiev, I. Tenney, N. Hua,
G. Cideron, E. Leurent, M. Alnahlawi, I. Georgescu, N. Wei, I. Zheng,
D. Scandinaro, H. Jiang, J. Snoek, M. Sundararajan, X. Wang, Z. Ontiveros, I. Karo, J. Cole, V. Rajashekhar, L. Tumeh, E. Ben-David,
R. Jain, J. Uesato, R. Datta, O. Bunyan, S. Wu, J. Zhang, P. Stanczyk,
Y. Zhang, D. Steiner, S. Naskar, M. Azzam, M. Johnson, A. Paszke,
C.-C. Chiu, J. S. Elias, A. Mohiuddin, F. Muhammad, J. Miao, A. Lee,
N. Vieillard, J. Park, J. Zhang, J. Stanway, D. Garmon, A. Karmarkar,
Z. Dong, J. Lee, A. Kumar, L. Zhou, J. Evens, W. Isaac, G. Irving,
E. Loper, M. Fink, I. Arkatkar, N. Chen, I. Shafran, I. Petrychenko,
Z. Chen, J. Jia, A. Levskaya, Z. Zhu, P. Grabowski, Y. Mao, A. Magni,
K. Yao, J. Snaider, N. Casagrande, E. Palmer, P. Suganthan, A. Castaño,
I. Giannoumis, W. Kim, M. Rybiński, A. Sreevatsa, J. Prendki, D. Soergel, A. Goedeckemeyer, W. Gierke, M. Jafari, M. Gaba, J. Wiesner,
D. G. Wright, Y. Wei, H. Vashisht, Y. Kulizhskaya, J. Hoover, M. Le,
L. Li, C. Iwuanyanwu, L. Liu, K. Ramirez, A. Khorlin, A. Cui, T. LIN,
M. Wu, R. Aguilar, K. Pallo, A. Chakladar, G. Perng, E. A. Abellan,
M. Zhang, I. Dasgupta, N. Kushman, I. Penchev, A. Repina, X. Wu,
T. van der Weide, P. Ponnapalli, C. Kaplan, J. Simsa, S. Li, O. Dousse,
F. Yang, J. Piper, N. Ie, R. Pasumarthi, N. Lintz, A. Vijayakumar,
D. Andor, P. Valenzuela, M. Lui, C. Paduraru, D. Peng, K. Lee,
S. Zhang, S. Greene, D. D. Nguyen, P. Kurylowicz, C. Hardin, L. Dixon,
L. Janzer, K. Choo, Z. Feng, B. Zhang, A. Singhal, D. Du, D. McKinnon,
N. Antropova, T. Bolukbasi, O. Keller, D. Reid, D. Finchelstein, M. A.
Raad, R. Crocker, P. Hawkins, R. Dadashi, C. Gaffney, K. Franko, A. Bulanova, R. Leblond, S. Chung, H. Askham, L. C. Cobo, K. Xu, F. Fischer,
J. Xu, C. Sorokin, C. Alberti, C.-C. Lin, C. Evans, A. Dimitriev,
H. Forbes, D. Banarse, Z. Tung, M. Omernick, C. Bishop, R. Sterneck,
R. Jain, J. Xia, E. Amid, F. Piccinno, X. Wang, P. Banzal, D. J.
Mankowitz, A. Polozov, V. Krakovna, S. Brown, M. Bateni, D. Duan,
V. Firoiu, M. Thotakuri, T. Natan, M. Geist, S. tan Girgin, H. Li, J. Ye,
O. Roval, R. Tojo, M. Kwong, J. Lee-Thorp, C. Yew, D. Sinopalnikov,
S. Ramos, J. Mellor, A. Sharma, K. Wu, D. Miller, N. Sonnerat,

D. Vnukov, R. Greig, J. Beattie, E. Caveness, L. Bai, J. Eisenschlos,
A. Korchemniy, T. Tsai, M. Jasarevic, W. Kong, P. Dao, Z. Zheng,
F. Liu, F. Yang, R. Zhu, T. H. Teh, J. Sanmiya, E. Gladchenko, N. Trdin,
D. Toyama, E. Rosen, S. Tavakkol, L. Xue, C. Elkind, O. Woodman,
J. Carpenter, G. Papamakarios, R. Kemp, S. Kafle, T. Grunina, R. Sinha,
A. Talbert, D. Wu, D. Owusu-Afriyie, C. Du, C. Thornton, J. PontTuset, P. Narayana, J. Li, S. Fatehi, J. Wieting, O. Ajmeri, B. Uria,
Y. Ko, L. Knight, A. Héliou, N. Niu, S. Gu, C. Pang, Y. Li, N. Levine,
A. Stolovich, R. Santamaria-Fernandez, S. Goenka, W. Yustalim,
R. Strudel, A. Elqursh, C. Deck, H. Lee, Z. Li, K. Levin, R. Hoffmann,
D. Holtmann-Rice, O. Bachem, S. Arora, C. Koh, S. H. Yeganeh,
S. Põder, M. Tariq, Y. Sun, L. Ionita, M. Seyedhosseini, P. Tafti, Z. Liu,
A. Gulati, J. Liu, X. Ye, B. Chrzaszcz, L. Wang, N. Sethi, T. Li,
B. Brown, S. Singh, W. Fan, A. Parisi, J. Stanton, V. Koverkathu, C. A.
Choquette-Choo, Y. Li, T. Lu, A. Ittycheriah, P. Shroff, M. Varadarajan,
S. Bahargam, R. Willoughby, D. Gaddy, G. Desjardins, M. Cornero,
B. Robenek, B. Mittal, B. Albrecht, A. Shenoy, F. Moiseev, H. Jacobsson, A. Ghaffarkhah, M. Rivière, A. Walton, C. Crepy, A. Parrish,
Z. Zhou, C. Farabet, C. Radebaugh, P. Srinivasan, C. van der Salm,
A. Fidjeland, S. Scellato, E. Latorre-Chimoto, H. Klimczak-Plucińska,
D. Bridson, D. de Cesare, T. Hudson, P. Mendolicchio, L. Walker,
A. Morris, M. Mauger, A. Guseynov, A. Reid, S. Odoom, L. Loher, V. Cotruta, M. Yenugula, D. Grewe, A. Petrushkina, T. Duerig,
A. Sanchez, S. Yadlowsky, A. Shen, A. Globerson, L. Webb, S. Dua,
D. Li, S. Bhupatiraju, D. Hurt, H. Qureshi, A. Agarwal, T. Shani,
M. Eyal, A. Khare, S. R. Belle, L. Wang, C. Tekur, M. S. Kale, J. Wei,
R. Sang, B. Saeta, T. Liechty, Y. Sun, Y. Zhao, S. Lee, P. Nayak,
D. Fritz, M. R. Vuyyuru, J. Aslanides, N. Vyas, M. Wicke, X. Ma,
E. Eltyshev, N. Martin, H. Cate, J. Manyika, K. Amiri, Y. Kim, X. Xiong,
K. Kang, F. Luisier, N. Tripuraneni, D. Madras, M. Guo, A. Waters,
O. Wang, J. Ainslie, J. Baldridge, H. Zhang, G. Pruthi, J. Bauer, F. Yang,
R. Mansour, J. Gelman, Y. Xu, G. Polovets, J. Liu, H. Cai, W. Chen,
X. Sheng, E. Xue, S. Ozair, C. Angermueller, X. Li, A. Sinha, W. Wang,
J. Wiesinger, E. Koukoumidis, Y. Tian, A. Iyer, M. Gurumurthy,
M. Goldenson, P. Shah, M. Blake, H. Yu, A. Urbanowicz, J. Palomaki,
C. Fernando, K. Durden, H. Mehta, N. Momchev, E. Rahimtoroghi,
M. Georgaki, A. Raul, S. Ruder, M. Redshaw, J. Lee, D. Zhou, K. Jalan,
D. Li, B. Hechtman, P. Schuh, M. Nasr, K. Milan, V. Mikulik, J. Franco,
T. Green, N. Nguyen, J. Kelley, A. Mahendru, A. Hu, J. Howland,
B. Vargas, J. Hui, K. Bansal, V. Rao, R. Ghiya, E. Wang, K. Ye, J. M.
Sarr, M. M. Preston, M. Elish, S. Li, A. Kaku, J. Gupta, I. Pasupat, D.C. Juan, M. Someswar, T. M., X. Chen, A. Amini, A. Fabrikant, E. Chu,
X. Dong, A. Muthal, S. Buthpitiya, S. Jauhari, N. Hua, U. Khandelwal,
A. Hitron, J. Ren, L. Rinaldi, S. Drath, A. Dabush, N.-J. Jiang,
H. Godhia, U. Sachs, A. Chen, Y. Fan, H. Taitelbaum, H. Noga, Z. Dai,
J. Wang, C. Liang, J. Hamer, C.-S. Ferng, C. Elkind, A. Atias, P. Lee,
V. Listı́k, M. Carlen, J. van de Kerkhof, M. Pikus, K. Zaher, P. Müller,
S. Zykova, R. Stefanec, V. Gatsko, C. Hirnschall, A. Sethi, X. F. Xu,
C. Ahuja, B. Tsai, A. Stefanoiu, B. Feng, K. Dhandhania, M. Katyal,
A. Gupta, A. Parulekar, D. Pitta, J. Zhao, V. Bhatia, Y. Bhavnani,
O. Alhadlaq, X. Li, P. Danenberg, D. Tu, A. Pine, V. Filippova,
A. Ghosh, B. Limonchik, B. Urala, C. K. Lanka, D. Clive, Y. Sun, E. Li,
H. Wu, K. Hongtongsak, I. Li, K. Thakkar, K. Omarov, K. Majmundar,
M. Alverson, M. Kucharski, M. Patel, M. Jain, M. Zabelin, P. Pelagatti,
R. Kohli, S. Kumar, J. Kim, S. Sankar, V. Shah, L. Ramachandruni,
X. Zeng, B. Bariach, L. Weidinger, T. Vu, A. Andreev, A. He, K. Hui,
S. Kashem, A. Subramanya, S. Hsiao, D. Hassabis, K. Kavukcuoglu,
A. Sadovsky, Q. Le, T. Strohman, Y. Wu, S. Petrov, J. Dean, and
O. Vinyals, “Gemini: A Family of Highly Capable Multimodal Models,”
in arxiv.org, 2023.
[6] J. Bang, Y. Choi, M. Kim, Y. Kim, and M. Rhu, “vTrain: A Simulation Framework for Evaluating Cost-effective and Compute-optimal
Large Language Model Training,” in Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2024.
[7] Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, B. Gao, Y. Liu, Y. Li, T. Liu, K. Lu, W. Xiong,
Y. Dong, J. Hu et al., “PyramidKV: Dynamic KV Cache Compression
based on Pyramidal Information Funneling,” in arxiv.org, 2024.
[8] A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts,
P. Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton, S. Gehrmann, P. Schuh, K. Shi,
S. Tsvyashchenko, J. Maynez, A. Rao, P. Barnes, Y. Tay, N. Shazeer,
V. Prabhakaran, E. Reif, N. Du, B. Hutchinson, R. Pope, J. Bradbury,
J. Austin, M. Isard, G. Gur-Ari, P. Yin, T. Duke, A. Levskaya, S. Ghemawat, S. Dev, H. Michalewski, X. Garcia, V. Misra, K. Robinson, L. Fedus, D. Zhou, D. Ippolito, D. Luan, H. Lim, B. Zoph, A. Spiridonov,

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

R. Sepassi, D. Dohan, S. Agrawal, M. Omernick, A. M. Dai, T. S. Pillai,
M. Pellat, A. Lewkowycz, E. Moreira, R. Child, O. Polozov, K. Lee,
Z. Zhou, X. Wang, B. Saeta, M. Diaz, O. Firat, M. Catasta, J. Wei,
K. Meier-Hellstern, D. Eck, J. Dean, S. Petrov, and N. Fiedel, “PaLM:
Scaling Language Modeling with Pathways,” in arxiv.org, 2022.
[9] DeepSeek-AI, “DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32B,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen32B
[10] Y. Dubois, B. Galambosi, P. Liang, and T. B. Hashimoto, “LengthControlled AlpacaEval: A Simple Way to Debias Automatic Evaluators,”
in Conference on Language Modeling (COLM), 2024.
[11] J. Feng, Y. Huang, R. Zhang, S. Liang, M. Yan, and J. Wu, “WindServe: Efficient Phase-Disaggregated LLM Serving with Stream-based
Dynamic Scheduling,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium
on Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2025.
[12] Y. Fu, H. Peng, R. Schwartz, N. A. Smith, and D. Khashabi, “Automatic
Chain of Thought Prompting in Large Language Models,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2023.
[13] Y. Fu, J. Chen, S. Zhu, Z. Fu, Z. Dai, A. Qiao, and H. Zhang, “Efficiently
Serving LLM Reasoning Programs with Certaindex,” in arxiv.org, 2024.
[14] R. Gong, S. Bai, S. Wu, Y. Fan, Z. Wang, X. Li, H. Yang, and X. Liu,
“Past-Future Scheduler for LLM Serving under SLA Guarantees,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2025.
[15] A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-Dahle,
A. Letman, A. Mathur, A. Schelten, A. Vaughan, A. Yang, A. Fan,
A. Goyal, A. Hartshorn, A. Yang, A. Mitra, A. Sravankumar, A. Korenev,
A. Hinsvark, A. Rao, A. Zhang, A. Rodriguez, A. Gregerson, A. Spataru,
B. Roziere, B. Biron, B. Tang, B. Chern, C. Caucheteux, C. Nayak,
C. Bi, C. Marra, C. McConnell, C. Keller, C. Touret, C. Wu, C. Wong,
C. C. Ferrer, C. Nikolaidis, D. Allonsius, D. Song, D. Pintz, D. Livshits,
D. Wyatt, D. Esiobu, D. Choudhary, D. Mahajan, D. Garcia-Olano,
D. Perino, D. Hupkes, E. Lakomkin, E. AlBadawy, E. Lobanova,
E. Dinan, E. M. Smith, F. Radenovic, F. Guzmán, F. Zhang, G. Synnaeve,
G. Lee, G. L. Anderson, G. Thattai, G. Nail, G. Mialon, G. Pang, G. Cucurell, H. Nguyen, H. Korevaar, H. Xu, H. Touvron, I. Zarov, I. A. Ibarra,
I. Kloumann, I. Misra, I. Evtimov, J. Zhang, J. Copet, J. Lee, J. Geffert,
J. Vranes, J. Park, J. Mahadeokar, J. Shah, J. van der Linde, J. Billock,
J. Hong, J. Lee, J. Fu, J. Chi, J. Huang, J. Liu, J. Wang, J. Yu, J. Bitton,
J. Spisak, J. Park, J. Rocca, J. Johnstun, J. Saxe, J. Jia, K. V. Alwala,
K. Prasad, K. Upasani, K. Plawiak, K. Li, K. Heafield, K. Stone, K. ElArini, K. Iyer, K. Malik, K. Chiu, K. Bhalla, K. Lakhotia, L. RantalaYeary, L. van der Maaten, L. Chen, L. Tan, L. Jenkins, L. Martin,
L. Madaan, L. Malo, L. Blecher, L. Landzaat, L. de Oliveira, M. Muzzi,
M. Pasupuleti, M. Singh, M. Paluri, M. Kardas, M. Tsimpoukelli,
M. Oldham, M. Rita, M. Pavlova, M. Kambadur, M. Lewis, M. Si, M. K.
Singh, M. Hassan, N. Goyal, N. Torabi, N. Bashlykov, N. Bogoychev,
N. Chatterji, N. Zhang, O. Duchenne, O. Çelebi, P. Alrassy, P. Zhang,
P. Li, P. Vasic, P. Weng, P. Bhargava, P. Dubal, P. Krishnan, P. S. Koura,
P. Xu, Q. He, Q. Dong, R. Srinivasan, R. Ganapathy, R. Calderer, R. S.
Cabral, R. Stojnic, R. Raileanu, R. Maheswari, R. Girdhar, R. Patel,
R. Sauvestre, R. Polidoro, R. Sumbaly, R. Taylor, R. Silva, R. Hou,
R. Wang, S. Hosseini, S. Chennabasappa, S. Singh, S. Bell, S. S. Kim,
S. Edunov, S. Nie, S. Narang, S. Raparthy, S. Shen, S. Wan, S. Bhosale,
S. Zhang, S. Vandenhende, S. Batra, S. Whitman, S. Sootla, S. Collot,
S. Gururangan, S. Borodinsky, T. Herman, T. Fowler, T. Sheasha,
T. Georgiou, T. Scialom, T. Speckbacher, T. Mihaylov, T. Xiao, U. Karn,
V. Goswami, V. Gupta, V. Ramanathan, V. Kerkez, V. Gonguet, V. Do,
V. Vogeti, V. Albiero, V. Petrovic, W. Chu, W. Xiong, W. Fu, W. Meers,
X. Martinet, X. Wang, X. Wang, X. E. Tan, X. Xia, X. Xie, X. Jia,
X. Wang, Y. Goldschlag, Y. Gaur, Y. Babaei, Y. Wen, Y. Song, Y. Zhang,
Y. Li, Y. Mao, Z. D. Coudert, Z. Yan, Z. Chen, Z. Papakipos, A. Singh,
A. Srivastava, A. Jain, A. Kelsey, A. Shajnfeld, A. Gangidi, A. Victoria,
A. Goldstand, A. Menon, A. Sharma, A. Boesenberg, A. Baevski, A. Feinstein, A. Kallet, A. Sangani, A. Teo, A. Yunus, A. Lupu, A. Alvarado,
A. Caples, A. Gu, A. Ho, A. Poulton, A. Ryan, A. Ramchandani,
A. Dong, A. Franco, A. Goyal, A. Saraf, A. Chowdhury, A. Gabriel,
A. Bharambe, A. Eisenman, A. Yazdan, B. James, B. Maurer, B. Leonhardi, B. Huang, B. Loyd, B. D. Paola, B. Paranjape, B. Liu, B. Wu,
B. Ni, B. Hancock, B. Wasti, B. Spence, B. Stojkovic, B. Gamido,
B. Montalvo, C. Parker, C. Burton, C. Mejia, C. Liu, C. Wang, C. Kim,
C. Zhou, C. Hu, C.-H. Chu, C. Cai, C. Tindal, C. Feichtenhofer, C. Gao,
D. Civin, D. Beaty, D. Kreymer, D. Li, D. Adkins, D. Xu, D. Testuggine,

D. David, D. Parikh, D. Liskovich, D. Foss, D. Wang, D. Le, D. Holland,
E. Dowling, E. Jamil, E. Montgomery, E. Presani, E. Hahn, E. Wood,
E.-T. Le, E. Brinkman, E. Arcaute, E. Dunbar, E. Smothers, F. Sun,
F. Kreuk, F. Tian, F. Kokkinos, F. Ozgenel, F. Caggioni, F. Kanayet,
F. Seide, G. M. Florez, G. Schwarz, G. Badeer, G. Swee, G. Halpern,
G. Herman, G. Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, G. Lakshminarayanan, H. Inan,
H. Shojanazeri, H. Zou, H. Wang, H. Zha, H. Habeeb, H. Rudolph,
H. Suk, H. Aspegren, H. Goldman, H. Zhan, I. Damlaj, I. Molybog,
I. Tufanov, I. Leontiadis, I.-E. Veliche, I. Gat, J. Weissman, J. Geboski,
J. Kohli, J. Lam, J. Asher, J.-B. Gaya, J. Marcus, J. Tang, J. Chan,
J. Zhen, J. Reizenstein, J. Teboul, J. Zhong, J. Jin, J. Yang, J. Cummings,
J. Carvill, J. Shepard, J. McPhie, J. Torres, J. Ginsburg, J. Wang,
K. Wu, K. H. U, K. Saxena, K. Khandelwal, K. Zand, K. Matosich,
K. Veeraraghavan, K. Michelena, K. Li, K. Jagadeesh, K. Huang,
K. Chawla, K. Huang, L. Chen, L. Garg, L. A, L. Silva, L. Bell,
L. Zhang, L. Guo, L. Yu, L. Moshkovich, L. Wehrstedt, M. Khabsa,
M. Avalani, M. Bhatt, M. Mankus, M. Hasson, M. Lennie, M. Reso,
M. Groshev, M. Naumov, M. Lathi, M. Keneally, M. Liu, M. L. Seltzer,
M. Valko, M. Restrepo, M. Patel, M. Vyatskov, M. Samvelyan, M. Clark,
M. Macey, M. Wang, M. J. Hermoso, M. Metanat, M. Rastegari,
M. Bansal, N. Santhanam, N. Parks, N. White, N. Bawa, N. Singhal,
N. Egebo, N. Usunier, N. Mehta, N. P. Laptev, N. Dong, N. Cheng,
O. Chernoguz, O. Hart, O. Salpekar, O. Kalinli, P. Kent, P. Parekh,
P. Saab, P. Balaji, P. Rittner, P. Bontrager, P. Roux, P. Dollar, P. Zvyagina,
P. Ratanchandani, P. Yuvraj, Q. Liang, R. Alao, R. Rodriguez, R. Ayub,
R. Murthy, R. Nayani, R. Mitra, R. Parthasarathy, R. Li, R. Hogan,
R. Battey, R. Wang, R. Howes, R. Rinott, S. Mehta, S. Siby, S. J.
Bondu, S. Datta, S. Chugh, S. Hunt, S. Dhillon, S. Sidorov, S. Pan,
S. Mahajan, S. Verma, S. Yamamoto, S. Ramaswamy, S. Lindsay,
S. Lindsay, S. Feng, S. Lin, S. C. Zha, S. Patil, S. Shankar, S. Zhang,
S. Zhang, S. Wang, S. Agarwal, S. Sajuyigbe, S. Chintala, S. Max,
S. Chen, S. Kehoe, S. Satterfield, S. Govindaprasad, S. Gupta, S. Deng,
S. Cho, S. Virk, S. Subramanian, S. Choudhury, S. Goldman, T. Remez,
T. Glaser, T. Best, T. Koehler, T. Robinson, T. Li, T. Zhang, T. Matthews,
T. Chou, T. Shaked, V. Vontimitta, V. Ajayi, V. Montanez, V. Mohan,
V. S. Kumar, V. Mangla, V. Ionescu, V. Poenaru, V. T. Mihailescu,
V. Ivanov, W. Li, W. Wang, W. Jiang, W. Bouaziz, W. Constable,
X. Tang, X. Wu, X. Wang, X. Wu, X. Gao, Y. Kleinman, Y. Chen,
Y. Hu, Y. Jia, Y. Qi, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Adi, Y. Nam, Yu,
Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Hao, Y. Qian, Y. Li, Y. He, Z. Rait, Z. DeVito,
Z. Rosnbrick, Z. Wen, Z. Yang, Z. Zhao, and Z. Ma, “The Llama 3
Herd of Models,” in arxiv.org, 2024.
[16] D. Guo, D. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Song, R. Zhang, R. Xu, Q. Zhu, S. Ma,
P. Wang, X. Bi, X. Zhang, X. Yu, Y. Wu, Z. F. Wu, Z. Gou, Z. Shao,
Z. Li, Z. Gao, A. Liu, B. Xue, B. Wang, B. Wu, B. Feng, C. Lu, C. Zhao,
C. Deng, C. Zhang, C. Ruan, D. Dai, D. Chen, D. Ji, E. Li, F. Lin, F. Dai,
F. Luo, G. Hao, G. Chen, G. Li, H. Zhang, H. Bao, H. Xu, H. Wang,
H. Ding, H. Xin, H. Gao, H. Qu, H. Li, J. Guo, J. Li, J. Wang, J. Chen,
J. Yuan, J. Qiu, J. Li, J. L. Cai, J. Ni, J. Liang, J. Chen, K. Dong,
K. Hu, K. Gao, K. Guan, K. Huang, K. Yu, L. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Zhao,
L. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Xu, L. Xia, M. Zhang, M. Zhang, M. Tang, M. Li,
M. Wang, M. Li, N. Tian, P. Huang, P. Zhang, Q. Wang, Q. Chen, Q. Du,
R. Ge, R. Zhang, R. Pan, R. Wang, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, R. Chen, S. Lu,
S. Zhou, S. Chen, S. Ye, S. Wang, S. Yu, S. Zhou, S. Pan, S. S. Li,
S. Zhou, S. Wu, S. Ye, T. Yun, T. Pei, T. Sun, T. Wang, W. Zeng,
W. Zhao, W. Liu, W. Liang, W. Gao, W. Yu, W. Zhang, W. L. Xiao,
W. An, X. Liu, X. Wang, X. Chen, X. Nie, X. Cheng, X. Liu, X. Xie,
X. Liu, X. Yang, X. Li, X. Su, X. Lin, X. Q. Li, X. Jin, X. Shen,
X. Chen, X. Sun, X. Wang, X. Song, X. Zhou, X. Wang, X. Shan, Y. K.
Li, Y. Q. Wang, Y. X. Wei, Y. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Sun,
Y. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Xiong, Y. He, Y. Piao, Y. Wang,
Y. Tan, Y. Ma, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, Y. Ou, Y. Wang, Y. Gong, Y. Zou, Y. He,
Y. Xiong, Y. Luo, Y. You, Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. X. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Huang,
Y. Li, Y. Zheng, Y. Zhu, Y. Ma, Y. Tang, Y. Zha, Y. Yan, Z. Z. Ren,
Z. Ren, Z. Sha, Z. Fu, Z. Xu, Z. Xie, Z. Zhang, Z. Hao, Z. Ma, Z. Yan,
Z. Wu, Z. Gu, Z. Zhu, Z. Liu, Z. Li, Z. Xie, Z. Song, Z. Pan, Z. Huang,
Z. Xu, Z. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “DeepSeek-R1: Incentivizing Reasoning
Capability in LLMs via Reinforcement Learning,” in arxiv.org, 2025.
[17] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Kadavath, A. Arora, S. Basart, E. Tang,
D. Song, and J. Steinhardt, “Measuring Mathematical Problem Solving
With the MATH Dataset,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021.
[18] C. Holmes, M. Tanaka, M. Wyatt, A. A. Awan, J. Rasley, S. Rajbhandari,
R. Y. Aminabadi, H. Qin, A. Bakhtiari, L. Kurilenko, and Y. He,

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

“DeepSpeed-FastGen: High-throughput Text Generation for LLMs via
MII and DeepSpeed-Inference,” in arxiv.org, 2024.
[19] B. Hou, Y. Zhang, J. Ji, Y. Liu, K. Qian, J. Andreas, and S. Chang,
“ThinkPrune: Pruning Long Chain-of-Thought of LLMs via Reinforcement Learning,” in arxiv.org, 2025.
[20] N. Jain, K. Han, A. Gu, W.-D. Li, F. Yan, T. Zhang, S. Wang,
A. Solar-Lezama, K. Sen, and I. Stoica, “LiveCodeBench: Holistic and
Contamination Free Evaluation of Large Language Models for Code,”
in arxiv.org, 2024.
[21] C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei, O. Press, and K. R.
Narasimhan, “SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World
GitHub Issues?” in Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[22] A. K. Kakolyris, D. Masouros, P. Vavaroutsos, S. Xydis, and D. Soudris,
“throttLL’eM: Predictive GPU Throttling for Energy Efficient LLM
Inference Serving ,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on
High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), 2025.
[23] A. K. Kamath, R. Prabhu, J. Mohan, S. Peter, R. Ramjee, and A. Panwar,
“POD-Attention: Unlocking Full Prefill-Decode Overlap for Faster LLM
Inference,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems
(ASPLOS), 2025.
[24] H. Kim, G. Ye, N. Wang, A. Yazdanbakhsh, and N. S. Kim, “Exploiting
Intel Advanced Matrix Extensions (AMX) for Large Language Model
Inference,” in IEEE Computer Architecture Letters, 2024.
[25] S. Krishna, K. Krishna, A. Mohananey, S. Schwarcz, A. Stambler,
S. Upadhyay, and M. Faruqui, “Fact, Fetch, and Reason: A Unified
Evaluation of Retrieval-Augmented Generation,” in arxiv.org, 2025.
[26] A. V. Kumar, G. Antichi, and R. Singh, “AQUA: Network-Accelerated
Memory Offloading for LLMs in Scale-Up GPU Domains,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS), 2025.
[27] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. E.
Gonzalez, H. Zhang, and I. Stoica, “Efficient Memory Management for
Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention,” in Proceedings
of the ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles (SOSP), 2023.
[28] A. Lewkowycz, T. Khot, B. Dalvi, P. Shaw, D. Das, K. Lee, J. Chen,
X. Wang, S. Das, E. Zelikman, B. Murdoch, E. Kokiopoulou, G. Ghosh,
E. Chi, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou, W. Cohen, J. Gupta, and S. Oh, “MetaMath:
A Benchmark for Evaluating Reasoning with Language Models,” in
arxiv.org, 2023.
[29] T. Li, W.-L. Chiang, E. Frick, L. Dunlap, T. Wu, B. Zhu, J. E. Gonzalez,
and I. Stoica, “From Crowdsourced Data to High-Quality Benchmarks:
Arena-Hard and BenchBuilder Pipeline,” in arxiv.org, 2024.
[30] Y.-C. Lin, W. Kwon, R. Pineda, and F. N. Paravecino, “Toward Highperformance LLM Serving: A Simulation-Based Approach for Identifying Optimal Parallelism,” in arxiv.org, 2024.
[31] J. Liu, J.-W. Chung, Z. Wu, F. Lai, M. Lee, and M. Chowdhury,
“Andes: Defining and Enhancing Quality-of-Experience in LLM-based
Text Streaming Services,” in arxiv.org, 2024.
[32] MLCommons, https://mlcommons.org/2025/09/small-llm-inference-51/, 2025.
[33] S. Na, G. Jeong, B. H. Ahn, J. Young, T. Krishna, and H. Kim,
“Understanding Performance Implications of LLM Inference on CPUs,”
in Proceedings of the International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC), 2024.
[34] NVIDIA, “NVIDIA Dynamo Platform,” https://developer.nvidia.com/
dynamo, 2025.
[35] NVIDIA, “Rubin CPX,” https://nvidianews.nvidia.com/news/nvidiaunveils-rubin-cpx-a-new-class-of-gpu-designed-for-massive-contextinference, 2025.
[36] NVIDIA, “Rubin platform,” https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/computex2024-jensen-huang/, 2025.
[37] OpenAI, “GPT-4 Technical Report,” in arxiv.org, 2023.
[38] OpenAI,
https://cdn.openai.com/pdf/2221c875-02dc-4789-800be7758f3722c1/o3-and-o4-mini-system-card.pdf, 2025.
[39] P. Patel, E. Choukse, C. Zhang, A. Shah, Í. Goiri, S. Maleki, and
R. Bianchini, “Splitwise: Efficient Generative LLM Inference Using
Phase Splitting,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2024.
[40] A. Patke, D. Reddy, S. Jha, H. Qiu, C. Pinto, C. Narayanaswami, Z. T.
Kalbarczyk, and R. Iyer, “Queue Management for SLO-Oriented Large
Language Model Serving,” in Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on
Cloud Computing (SoCC), 2024.

[41] D. Rein, B. L. Hou, A. C. Stickland, J. Petty, R. Y. Pang, J. Dirani,
J. Michael, and S. R. Bowman, “GPQA: A Graduate-Level Google-Proof
Q&A Benchmark,” in Conference on Language Modeling (COLM),
2024.
[42] Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, B. Yuan, Z. Li, M. Ryabinin, B. Chen, P. Liang,
C. Ré, I. Stoica, and C. Zhang, “FlexGen: High-Throughput Generative
Inference of Large Language Models with a Single GPU,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2023.
[43] J. Stojkovic, C. Zhang, Í. Goiri, J. Torrellas, and E. Choukse, “DynamoLLM: Designing LLM Inference Clusters for Performance and
Energy Efficiency,” in Proceedings of the International Symposium on
High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA), 2025.
[44] B. Sun, Z. Huang, H. Zhao, W. Xiao, X. Zhang, Y. Li, and W. Lin,
“Llumnix: Dynamic Scheduling for Large Language Model Serving,” in
Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI), 2024.
[45] Q. Team, “QwQ-32B: Embracing the Power of Reinforcement
Learning,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/
qwq-32b/
[46] X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. Le, E. Chi, S. Narang, A. Chowdhery, and D. Zhou, “Self-consistency Improves Chain of Thought
Reasoning in Language Models,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[47] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. Chi,
Q. V. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain-of-Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning
in Large Language Models,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
[48] B. Wu, Y. Zhong, Z. Zhang, S. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Sun, G. Huang, X. Liu, and
X. Jin, “Fast Distributed Inference Serving for Large Language Models,”
in arxiv.org, 2023.
[49] S. Yao, E. Nijkamp, M. Bosma, X. Zhao, T. Wu, D. Zhou, and
D. Schuurmans, “ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language
Models,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[50] S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. L. Griffiths, Y. Cao, and
K. Narasimhan, “Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving with
Large Language Models,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
[51] G.-I. Yu, J. S. Jeong, G.-W. Kim, S. Kim, and B.-G. Chun, “ORCA: A
Distributed Serving System for Transformer-Based Generative Models,”
in Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI), 2022.
[52] Z. Zhang, Y. Sheng, T. Zhou, T. Chen, L. Zheng, R. Cai, Z. Song,
Y. Tian, C. Ré, C. Barrett et al., “H2O: Heavy-Hitter Oracle for Efficient
Generative Inference of Large Language Models,” 2023.
[53] Y. Zhao, D. Wu, and J. Wang, “ALISA: Accelerating Large Language
Model Inference via Sparsity-Aware KV Caching,” in Proceedings of
the International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2024.
[54] Y. Zhong, S. Liu, J. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, X. Jin, and H. Zhang,
“DistServe: Disaggregating Prefill and Decoding for Goodput-optimized
Large Language Model Serving,” in Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), 2024.
[55] D. Zhou, N. Schärli, L. Hou, J. Wei, N. Scales, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans,
C. Cui, O. Bousquet, Q. Le, and E. Chi, “Least-to-Most Prompting Enables Complex Reasoning in Large Language Models,” in Proceedings
of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2023.

Authorized licensed use limited to: BEIHANG UNIVERSITY. Downloaded on May 04,2026 at 04:32:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

